Healthy Churches:
A Beginner’s Guide


 I                                    IV

             II            III

 V                                    VI
       I                     IV


                  II III
       V                     VI


VII                                   IX
       VII                       IX


                  VIII
Editorial Director: Jonathan Leeman
Managing Editor: Taylor Hartley
Editors: Alex Duke and David Daniels
Copy Editor: Judith Henderson
Executive Director: Ryan Townsend
President: Mark Dever
Cover Design: Jeri Choi
Layout Design: Rubner Durais
eBook ISBN: 979-8-89218-137-2


Healthy Churches: A Beginner’s Guide
Copyright © 2025 by 9Marks
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopy, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission
of 9Marks, except as provided for by USA copyright law.

Scripture quotations are from the ESV® Bible (The Holy Bible, English
Standard Version®), copyright © 2001 by Crossway, a publishing ministry of
Good News Publishers. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
All emphases in Scripture quotations have been added by the author.

Tools like this are provided by the generous investment of donors.
Each gift to 9Marks helps equip church leaders with a biblical vision and
practical resources for displaying God’s glory to the nations through healthy
churches.

Donate at: www.9marks.org/donate.
Or make checks payable to “9Marks” and mail to:
         9 Marks
         525 A St. NE
         Washington, DC 20002

info@9marks.org | www.9marks.org
                       Table of Contents

Introduction.............................................................................................6

1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING
The Preacher and the Text: What Is the Goal of the Message?.......8
    by Aaron Menikoff

Evangelistic Expository Preaching.....................................................19
    by Mark Dever

A Biblical Case for Expositional Preaching......................................43
    by Mike Bullmore


2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE
Jesus Cared About Doctrine. .............................................................47
     by Samuel Parkison

What Is the Gospel?. ..........................................................................56
   by Greg Gilbert

Gospel-Centrality: A Warning and a Recommendation. ...............67
    by Bobby Jamieson


3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM
How Should We Define Evangelism?...............................................72
    by J. Mack Stiles

One of the Dirtiest Words Today: C--------n..................................75
    by Brad Wheeler
The Corporate Component of Conversion. .....................................88
      by Jonathan Leeman

Connecting Evangelism and Church.................................................94
      by Jonathan Leeman

The Problem with Evangelistic Programs. .....................................102
      by J. Mack Stiles


4. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP
Church Membership Is an Office and a Job...................................109
      by Jonathan Leeman

Meaningful Membership & Shepherding the Saints. ...................116
      by Jason Seville


5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE
A Church Discipline Primer............................................................123
      by Jonathan Leeman

A Step-by-Step Primer for Church Discipline..............................137
      by Geoff Chang


6. DISCIPLESHIP
Elders — The Church’s Lead Disciple-Makers. ............................145
      by Jeramie Rinne

Discipleship According to the Scriptures.......................................150
      by Garrett Kell
7. CHURCH LEADERSHIP
Elders: Lead!. .....................................................................................156
    by Bobby Jamieson

Our Church Wants a Plurality of Elders, but We Don’t Know
Where to Start...................................................................................161
   by Dave Harvey

How to Separate Deacon Work from Elder Work. ......................166
   by Matt Schmucker


8. PRAYER
On the Use and Importance of Corporate Prayer. ........................172
    by Mark Dever

Corporate Prayer...............................................................................184
    by Jamie Dunlop


9. MISSIONS
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions. ............................................202
    by Aubrey Sequeira

The Case for Long-Term Missions..................................................227
    by Brooks Buser

The Lost Coin....................................................................................235
    by Mark Dever

The Church: Universal and Local....................................................239
    by Jonathan Leeman

About the Authors...............................................................................252
                     Introduction




For more than twenty-five years, 9Marks has been all about what we
call nine marks of a healthy church. They are expositional preaching,
gospel doctrine, conversion and evangelism, church membership,
church discipline, discipleship and growth, church leadership,
prayer, and missions. To be sure, we aren’t claiming these are the
only marks for healthy churches. So why these nine? Because the
Bible requires them. Because, sadly, too many evangelical churches
have neglected or assumed them. And because churches best herald
the gospel when they are characterized by them.
      Some of you may be new to 9Marks. If so, think of this e-book
as a beginner’s guide. Here you will find brief descriptions and also
some of our favorite past articles introducing you to the nine marks
and what they have to do with church health. If you’ve been around
for a while, this may be like a refresher course as well as a tool for
you to encourage other church leaders with. In either case, we pray
your church would benefit from considering these nine marks of a
healthy church.




6 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. Expositional
   Preaching
WHAT IS IT?
Expositional preaching makes the main point of a passage of Scrip-
ture the main point of the sermon and then applies that point to the
life of the congregation.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• According to Scripture, God accomplishes his purposes through
  speaking to his people (see Gen. 1:3, Isa. 55:10–11, Acts 12:24).
  This means that for sermons to be filled with God’s power,
  preachers must preach God’s Word.
• The Bible has many examples of expositional preaching and
  teaching. Think of the Levitical priests who taught the Law
  (Deut. 33:10), Ezra and the Levites who read from the Law and
  gave the sense of it (Neh. 8:8), and Peter and the apostles who
  expounded Scripture and urged their hearers to respond with
  repentance and faith (Acts 2:14–41, 13:16–47).
• On the other hand, God condemns those who “speak of their
  own imagination, not from the mouth of the Lord” ( Jer. 23:16,
  18, 21–22).

WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Expositional preaching is important because God’s Word is what
convicts, gives new life, builds up, and sanctifies God’s people
(Heb. 4:12; 1 Pet. 1:23; 1 Thes. 2:13; John 17:17). What God’s
people need is not a preacher’s wisdom, but God’s wisdom.



7 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
      The Preacher and the Text:
       What Is the Goal of the
              Message?
                       AARON MENIKOFF




“If you get the priority of the Word established, then you have in
place the single most important aspect of the church’s life, and grow-
ing health is virtually assured, because God has decided to act by his
Spirit through his Word.”1

INTRODUCTION: THE GLORY OF GOD IN THE
PREACHING OF THE WORD
In 2006 the Pew Charitable Trusts released its annual report on
American journalism, “The State of the News Media.” The report
charted everything from the rise of blogging to the declining cir-
culation of print newspapers. The people from Pew asked some
interesting questions. For example, they explored whether the public
“trusts” the news. One pollster concluded it is the general perception
“that news organizations act out of their own economic self-interest,
and journalists themselves act to advance their own careers.”2 No
surprise there. When asked if the news media is primarily inter-
ested in informing the public or attracting bigger audiences, the vast

1   Mark Dever, Nine Marks of a Healthy Church, p.25
2   The State of the News Media 2006. Found at http://www.stateofthenewsmedia.
    org/2006/narrative_overview_publicattitudes.asp?cat=8&media=1. Accessed May
    24, 2006.


8 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Preacher and the Text: What Is the Goal of the Message?


majority concluded the media is most interested in increasing rat-
ings.3 Of course, the fear is that the quality of journalism suffers when
delivering the news becomes secondary to gaining viewers. When the
goal is popularity, hard news inevitably becomes a thing of the past.
      Sadly, the same phenomenon can take place in the local church.
When the primary goal is numerical growth, the good news inevitably
takes a backseat to entertainment. Consumerism twists the preacher’s
task, making him a servant of the pew instead of the Word. This begs
the question, “When it comes to preaching, what is the goal?” I’m in
agreement with John Piper who argued that the goal of preaching is
the glory of God.4 The pastor’s primary duty is to make much of the
sovereign, holy, gracious, loving, unchanging Lord in everything he
does and says. This is the ultimate goal in preaching.
      But the glory of God is the goal of all of life, isn’t it? Is there a
goal in preaching that is unique to preaching? Is there a goal par-
ticularly crafted to help battle the temptation to consumerism that
plagues most every preacher? I think there is. The goal of each mes-
sage, week in and week out, is the very definition of expositional
preaching: making sure that the point of your sermon is the point
of the passage of Scripture from which you have chosen to preach.5
Indeed, God is glorified when His Word is clearly and faithfully
proclaimed. That is the duty of a preacher and the goal of preach-
ing. Let the chips fall where they may. Those called to preach have
the responsibility of preaching each text faithfully, of making sure
that each sermon captures the point of the text. This is expositional
preaching in a nutshell—this is the preacher’s job description dis-
tilled to its essence.

3   Ibid.
4   John Piper, The Supremacy of God in Preaching (Grand Rapids, Baker Books, 1990), 19.
5   Mark Dever, Nine Marks of a Healthy Church (Wheaton: Crossway, 2000), 26.


9 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


      Several years ago, I worked as an assistant for my United States
Senator from Oregon. Occasionally I would have the opportunity to
represent him at a meeting and it was very clear in those meetings
whose identity was important—not mine! My name did not really
matter; all that mattered was that I brought a message from the
Senator. When I first began to preach I remember having a similar
impression. Although I was not unimportant—the Lord had, after
all, called me to this task of studying and preaching the Word—I
was simply there to deliver the point of the message as faithfully and
earnestly as I could. I was not there by my own authority but by the
authority of Jesus Christ. I was not there to grow a church or to win
fans or to win favor—I was there to preach the Word of God—to
make God’s point—the point of that text—the point of my sermon.
I was there to preach the Word.
      Recognizing the goal of preaching frees one from so many other
distracting concerns. The preacher focused on preaching the point of
the text need not worry about being the smartest or most articulate
man in the room. No, these are not the concerns of an expositional
preacher. The expositional preacher, instead, comes “in weakness and
in fear and much trembling” with a “demonstration of the Spirit and
of power, that your faith might not rest in the wisdom of men but in
the power of God” (1 Cor. 2:3, 5). How is this possible? By taking
the focus off of yourself (wisdom of men) and focusing on the text
(power of God). Again, God is glorified when his Word is clearly
proclaimed because such a proclamation is a repudiation of human
wisdom and a demonstration of his power.

PAUL AND BARNABAS: SUCCESS AND
THE DELIVERY OF THE WORD
In 1 Corinthians 2 the Apostle Paul describes relying on the power
of God. In Acts 13 and 14 we see this lived out in his and Barnabas’s

10 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Preacher and the Text: What Is the Goal of the Message?


ministry. Repeatedly, these apostles were given the opportunity to
preach the Word. In Acts 13 they were in Pisidian Antioch where
Paul preached in the Jewish synagogue. The gathering had just read
from the Law and Prophets (13:15) and Paul was invited to offer
a “word of exhortation for the people.” He proceeded to explain to
both Jews and God-fearing Gentiles how the Old Testament points
to Jesus Christ, “And we bring you the good news that what God
promised to the fathers, this he has fulfilled to us their children by
raising Jesus” (13:33). According to Luke, this message stirred up
interest: “The next Sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear
the word of the Lord.” However, not all the interest was positive:
“But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy
and began to contradict what was spoken by Paul, reviling him”
(13:45). Still, what did Paul speak, what did he preach? Did he
preach the wisdom of men? Never. He delivered “the word of the
Lord.” Though many rejoiced at this message, Paul and Barnabas
were driven out of Pisidian Antioch. Were they discouraged? No.
They “were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit” (Acts 13:52).
They accomplished their task; they preached the Word.
     They then headed for Iconium to continue their ministry. There
the results were the same. Many believed—both Jews and Greeks—
but they encountered hostile opposition (14:2). Again and again,
Luke draws the attention of the reader to the message of Paul and
Barnabas. What did they preach? In Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, and
then on the way back to Antioch in Pisidia, Pamphylia, and Perga
they preached “the word of his grace” (14:3), the “gospel” (14:7, 15,
21), and the “Word” (14:25). Did Paul and Barnabas only preach the
Word? Yes. They had no other message than this “Word of grace”
which, as he wrote later, “is able to build you up and to give you the
inheritance among all those who are sanctified” (20:32).

11 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


      Was the preaching of Paul and Barnabas successful? There
were certainly conversions in Iconium (14:1) and in Derbe (14:21).
Furthermore, Luke records that through the preaching the souls of
disciples were strengthened, they were encouraged to continue in
the faith, and they were reminded to stay the course in the midst of
tribulations (14:22). Leaders were raised up as well—further fruit
from the preached Word. Paul and Barnabas “appointed elders in
every church” (14:23). In short, preaching the Word converted sin-
ners, strengthened believers, and raised leaders. What an amazing
ministry—the power of God’s Word at work. However, were Paul
and Barnabas successful when their preaching raised enemies? They
were stoned and forced to flee Iconium (14:5–6). In Lystra Paul was
stoned again and left for dead (14:19). Were his words successful
though they raised such opposition? Yes, he was successful, at least
according to Jesus: “Blessed are you when others revile you and
persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my ac-
count” (Matt. 5:11). Preach the Word and let the persecution come.
      How does one account for Paul and Barnabas’s success? Was it
because they were apostles able to perform signs and wonders? No, the
signs and wonders did not produce faith. In fact, although some saw
them perform miracles, they nonetheless refused to believe (14:4). Was
it because Paul and Barnabas were popular—first century celebrities
who gathered a following wherever they went? Hardly. Their success
must be attributed to their preaching of the Word. In Acts 14:8–18
the Apostle Paul stood before a pagan audience that, like many twenty-
first century congregations, would not have been well versed in the
Scriptures. What did Paul do? He went to the Word. In a sermon that
resembles the one given at the Areopagus in Acts 17, Paul cited Exo-
dus 20:11 and reminded his listeners that the Lord God is the maker
of “the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in them” (14:15).

12 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Preacher and the Text: What Is the Goal of the Message?


Though his listeners were tempted to worship Paul, Paul pointed them
to the Word and called them to worship their Maker. There are no
more apostles today, but Paul’s example offers profound transferable
lessons for those committed to the task of preaching.
      First, faithful expositional preaching will be both attractive to
some and repellant to others. It was the case with Paul and Barnabas
and will be true with any preacher intent on making the point of the
biblical text the point of his message. After all, if Paul was the aroma
of life to those being saved but the aroma of death to the perishing the
same is true of preachers today who are commissioned to speak God’s
truth. Those who love God will love his Word faithfully and earnestly
preached; they will love getting to know him better as they get to know
his Word better. On the other hand, those who do not love the Lord
will not have an interest in his Word. They may be willing to come
to a church one Sunday morning for a sermon on time management,
but they will not be interested in the main point of John 4. What’s the
preacher to do? Preach John 4. A sermon on time management will
neither convert the sinner nor edify the saint; a message from John 4
that presents Jesus as the living water will do both.
      Second, faithful expositional preaching is always successful preach-
ing. Some preachers are better than others, there is no doubt about
that. We just have to accept the fact that the Lord has given some men
unusual gifts. Nonetheless, as I look at Paul and Barnabas’s ministry in
Acts 13 and 14, and as I think about the goal of preaching—preaching
the point of the text—I find myself hugely encouraged. Again, I don’t
have to be the best preacher to be a faithful preacher. My goal isn’t to
be the best. If that’s my goal I’m doing the wrong thing with my life
anyway; I’m pursuing human wisdom and not the cross of Christ! My
goal has to be what Paul and Barnabas exemplified: constantly preach-
ing the Word, the good news, the Word of grace, the gospel.

13 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


A HISTORICAL EXAMPLE: CHRYSOSTOM AND
THE CENTRALITY OF THE WORD
John Chrysostom (ca. 347–407) became the bishop of Constan-
tinople in 398. He is considered the greatest preacher in the early
church (chrysostomos actually means, “golden-mouthed”). He was an
expositional preacher in the tradition of Antioch—a tradition that
focused on a literal interpretation of the text as opposed to the al-
legorical, fanciful interpretations associated with the Alexandrian
tradition. While criticizing Chrysostom for some of his interpreta-
tions, especially of the Old Testament, the Baptist John A. Broadus
nonetheless offers glowing praise, “Chrysostom has never had a su-
perior, and it may be gravely doubted whether he has had an equal,
in the history of preaching.”6
      John was born in Antioch in Syria and was raised by his moth-
er. He was baptized at the age of 21 and soon began to study the
Bible under the bishop of Antioch. After several years of ministe-
rial training he was ordained a presbyter in 386—this is when he
began to preach regularly. Broadus notes that he started his preach-
ing ministry rather late in life. “In our impatient age and country,
when so many think time spent in preparation is time lost, it is well
to remember that the two most celebrated preachers of the early
Christian centuries began to preach, Chrysostom at thirty-nine, and
Augustine at thirty-six.”7
      Chyrsostom took books of the Bible and he preached through
them. During the introduction of one sermon, he reminded his con-
gregation why he told them, in advance, of his sermon texts:

6   John A. Broadus, Lectures on the History of Preaching (Birmingham: Solid
    Ground Christian Books, 2004; reprint, New York: A.C. Armstrong, 1907), 77.
7   Ibid., 76.


14 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Preacher and the Text: What Is the Goal of the Message?


       I often tell you many days in advance the subject of what I am going to say,
       in order that you may take up the book in the intervening days, go over the
       whole passage, learn both what is said and what is left out, and so make
       your understanding more ready to learn when you hear what I will say af-
       terwards.8


      Here is an example of a preacher who made Scripture the cen-
terpiece of his ministry. He continues, “I also always entreat you, and
do not cease entreating you, not only to pay attention here to what I
say, but also when you are at home, to persevere continually in read-
ing the divine Scriptures.”9 He trusted in the power of the Word of
God to change lives and to equip believers to overcome temptation:

       Therefore we have a continuous need for the full armor of the Scriptures
       . . . For example, the designs of the flesh attack more fiercely those who live
       in the midst of the world. A handsome face, a splendid body strikes us in
       the eyes; a shameful phrase weakens the tension of our soul. But why am
       I saying this? That which often seems the slightest of all these attacks, the
       scent of perfume falling from courtesans as they pass somewhere nearby
       has captured and taken us away as prisoners by mere accident. And there
       are many things like these which besiege our souls . . . We must thoroughly
       quench the darts of the devil and beat them off by the continual reading of
       the divine Scriptures.10


     At this point in his sermon Chrysostom turned to the Scrip-
tures, Luke 16. He read the Word of God and began to unfold the
meaning of the text for the congregation. Chyrsostom trusted in the

8  St. John Chrysostom, On Wealth and Poverty, trans. Catherine P. Roth (Crest-
   wood, NY: St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 1984), 58.
9 Ibid.
10 Ibid., 59.


15 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


power of the Word of God to change, feed, and grow the disciples
entrusted into his care. He modeled the ministry exemplified by
Paul and Barnabas—a ministry that depended upon the Word of
God. Can the same be said of those of us who preach regularly to-
day? Do we have the same faith that the Word of God can and will
do its work?

CONCLUSION: THE GLORY OF GOD IN THE
SUFFICIENCY OF THE WORD
Christian theologians often refer to four characteristics of Scrip-
ture: its authority, clarity, necessity, and sufficiency. Obviously it is
essential for a pastor to affirm each of these characteristics. With no
authoritative Word there is no reason for the pastor to ever stand
behind a pulpit. Because Scripture is clear, the preacher (and, for
that matter, every Christian) can trust the Word can be understood.
Scripture is necessary—the preacher must preach (Rom. 10:13–17).
Finally, Scripture is sufficient. As Wayne Grudem puts it, “The suf-
ficiency of Scripture means that Scripture contained all the words
of God he intended his people to have at each stage of redemptive
history, and that it now contains all the words of God we need for
salvation, for trusting him perfectly, and for obeying him perfectly.”11
      When I say I preach expositionally because I trust in the Word
of God, I am affirming the sufficiency of Scripture. I am affirming
that Genesis to Revelation holds everything that God’s people need
to be sustained. What a comfort this is to me, that God’s Word has
everything I need and everything my church needs. I don’t need to
bring myself; I just need to bring the Word of God.
      Can other types of preaching also affirm the sufficiency of the
Word—topical preaching, for example, that expounds a biblical

11   Wayne Grudem, Systematic Theology (Leicester: Inter-Varsity Press, 1994), 127.


16 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Preacher and the Text: What Is the Goal of the Message?


theme by synthesizing several biblical passages? Of course! Not only
that; I think topical preaching can, at times, be helpful for a congre-
gation. However, I don’t think bringing a congregation to a preacher’s
synthesis is the same as bringing a people to the text. Expositional
preaching strives to bring the church to the text—that’s what they
need. They need to be able to see the text for themselves—to see it
and believe it. As Grudem said, Scripture is sufficient for salvation,
for trusting the Lord, for obeying him. So let’s bring congregations as
close to the text and as deep into the text as possible. Topical preach-
ing is like a road that passes by the house. Expositional preaching is
like a driveway that takes you to the front door. As often as we can,
by God’s grace, let’s drive the congregation right to that front door!
      J.W. Alexander (1804–1859), son of Princeton’s Archibald
Alexander, was a professor and a pastor. In his work, Thoughts on
Preaching, he encourages expository preaching, in part because it
highlights the sufficiency of the Word and takes the spotlight off
the preacher:

       Such a mode of preaching is less adapted than its opposite to make the
       speaker a separate object of regard, and might be selected by many on this
       very account. It is now some years since we enjoyed the privilege of listening
       to the late pious and eloquent Summerfield, the charm of whose brilliant
       and pathetic discourses will never be forgotten by those who heard them.
       After having, on a certain occasion, delivered a deeply impressive sermon on
       Isaiah vi. 1–6, he remarked to the writer of these pages that, in consequence
       of having been pursued by multitudes of applauding hearers, he had been
       led to exercise himself more in the way of simple exposition, as that which
       most threw the preacher into the shade, and most illustriously displayed the
       pure truth of the Word.12

12   James W. Alexander, Thoughts on Preaching (Carlisle: Banner of Truth, 1988), 251-52.


17 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


     May those of us who preach be quite willing to be thrown into
the shade that the truth of the Word might be illustriously displayed.
This is the benefit of expositional preaching. God is glorified when
the point of the text is faithfully and earnestly proclaimed.




18 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                  Evangelistic
              Expository Preaching1
                                 MARK DEVER



Much has been written on evangelistic preaching. And much has
been written on expositional preaching. Often, though, we tend to
think of the two as mutually exclusive, rather than as normally in-
separable. We think that the converted need Bible teaching and the
unconverted need evangelistic addresses.
     This article intends to question that conclusion. Instead, I want
to suggest another way that we should think of our obligations in
preaching to both Christians and non-Christians. We will proceed
with the conviction that the converted and the unconverted need
preaching in which the fullness of God’s Word is exposed and the
atoning work of Christ explored.
     That a Christian sermon should both expound God’s Word
and declare his good news is not surprising. In fact, just in writing
that sentence (without using the normal words expositional and
evangelistic) it seems absurd to think otherwise.
     But many do. Perhaps we ourselves sometimes wonder how
we can be better expositors, but we never consider our presenta-
tion of the gospel in our sermons. Or perhaps we want to be better
evangelists, but we cannot see how that has anything to do with our
preaching. It is the goal of this article to make plain how those two
concerns are vitally connected.

1 Editor’s note: This article was originally published as a chapter in Give Praise to God: A
   Vision for Reforming Worship, republished with permission from P&R Publishing.


19 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


A BIBLICAL PATTERN
The gospel is the story of the Bible. If we are committed to preach-
ing the Bible, we will find ourselves preaching the gospel. Graeme
Goldsworthy puts it forcefully: “All preaching, to be true to the
biblical perspective, must in some sense be gospel preaching. . . Ex-
pository, biblical preaching is always an exposition of the gospel and
its implications.”2
      Throughout the Old Testament, God’s Word is the fount and
the focus of proclamation. In the New Testament, the fulfillment of
his promises in Christ is at the center of the teaching.
      The Lord Jesus’s ministry centered on teaching the truth about
his own identity and mission. In Mark 2, we see Jesus appropriat-
ing scriptural themes from the Old Testament, explaining that their
true meaning was found in their pointing to him. So he presents
himself as the bridegroom come for his bride, as the Son of Man, as
the Lord of the Sabbath. All of these titles were connected closely
with God himself in the Old Testament. Now, Jesus announced that
they were fulfilled in him.
      Throughout the New Testament, we find a close connection
between exposing the meaning of Scripture and pointing to God’s
good news in Christ. In Luke 24, the risen Christ does an extraor-
dinary Bible study with two of his disciples. We read in Luke 24:27:
“And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, he explained to
them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself.” A little
later in the same chapter, Christ came to be with “the eleven and
those with them” (24:36) and said,
      “This is what I told you while I was still with you: Everything
must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the

2   Graeme Goldsworthy, Preaching the Whole Bible as Christian Scripture (Grand Rapids:
    Eerdmans, 2000), 95–96.


20 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


Prophets, and the Psalms.” Then he opened their minds so they
could understand the Scriptures. He told them, “This is what is writ-
ten: The Christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day,
and repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name
to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem” (24:44–47).
      The evangelistic sermons those disciples preached, recorded
in the book of Acts, follow this same pattern—they arise from
the text and they point to Christ. So Peter at Pentecost begins
by quoting a passage from the prophet Joel and explaining it and
current events in its light. Then he presses home the news about
Jesus from various psalms.
      Again in Acts 3, when Peter is presented with a crowd aware
of a miraculous healing, he turns to the Lord’s prediction through
Moses in Deuteronomy 18 about God’s raising up “a prophet like
me” and announces that Jesus is that prophet. Peter then begins to
make clear what their response to this should be. Throughout the
Book of Acts this is the pattern we find:

      As his custom was, Paul went into the synagogue, and on three Sabbath
      days he reasoned with them from the Scriptures, explaining and proving
      that the Christ had to suffer and rise from the dead. “This Jesus I am pro-
      claiming to you is the Christ,” he said. Some of the Jews were persuaded and
      joined Paul and Silas, as did a large number of God-fearing Greeks and not
      a few prominent women (17:2–4).


     Certainly, not every evangelistic address must be a straightfor-
ward exposition of one passage of Scripture. In Acts 17, in Athens,
the center of Greek learning, Paul is drawn into a dispute with “a
group of Epicurean and Stoic philosophers.” Ten verses (17:22–31)
record Paul’s words—none of which cite any Old Testament pas-
sages—to the meeting of the Areopagus.

21 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


      Today, ministers of the gospel may have similar opportunities
in series of evangelistic or apologetic talks outside the regular as-
sembly of a Christian church, for example, on college campuses or in
other meetings expressly for this purpose. We can certainly proclaim
the gospel of Christ outside our regular expositional ministry.
      Our regular preaching of God’s Word, however, should never
fail to point to Christ. Whether we preach from the New Testament
or the Old, the apostolic pattern is to declare God’s Word to God’s
people, always pointing to the fulfillment of his promises in Christ.
      This pattern is continued in the letters of the New Testament, a
treasury of inspired Christian homilies. In his letters to the Galatian
Christians and the Christians in Rome, Paul reasoned closely about
the gospel from the Old Testament. His text of choice was often
Genesis 15:6: “Abram believed the Lord, and he credited it to him
as righteousness.” From this passage, in Galatians 3 and Romans 4,
Paul carefully reasoned and passionately declared the hope that
we have in Christ. With believing eyes, the writer to the Hebrews
leads us through the Old Testament stories and the practices of the
temple. He does this with great care, and all to show us Christ.
      The biblical pattern is for a Christian preacher to proclaim and
explain God’s Word to God’s people. And the heart of that Word is
always Christ. So today, too, we need preaching that is both exposi-
tional and evangelistic. Let’s consider those each briefly in turn.

THE NEED FOR ALL OF GOD’S WORD:
EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING
Expositional preaching is all about giving God’s people God’s Word.
It is preaching in which the point of the biblical passage is the point
of the preacher’s message. This is what it means to preach exposi-
tionally—to expose God’s Word.

22 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


      Christians are obviously to be fed with God’s Word. As our
Lord said to the tempter: “Man does not live on bread alone, but
on every word that comes from the mouth of God” (Matt. 4:4;
Luke 4:4). Even in his answer, Jesus demonstrated his utter depen-
dence upon God’s Word. He quoted Deuteronomy 8:3, where the
Lord, through Moses, instructed his people at the end of their wil-
derness wanderings that his most important provision for them was
not manna, but his Word.
      Non-Christians too, though, need God’s Word. Those who do
not yet believe the gospel need to be told of their hopelessness apart
from Christ. They need to have God’s Word presented to them; they
need God’s Spirit to convict them of their own sin and desperation.
Being so liable to God’s judgment, they need to hear of God’s grace.
      All this can happen through expositional preaching. Through
such biblically faithful sermons, non-Christians can have Satan’s
lies exposed, God’s truth revealed, their own hearts searched, and
Christ’s grace magnified to them.
      In our day, we see evangelism as something usually brief and
urgent, whereas the edification of believers is to be patiently and
carefully done. In truth, real evangelism often needs to be every bit
as patiently pursued and every bit as carefully done. It may be that
the believers in your church need to be taught the truths in Genesis
in order to understand more fully that the one who made them is
holy, that this holy God is sovereign, or that they are to respond
in repentance and faith to the mercies of God. But surely our non-
Christian friends need this no less.
      How often has God used the patient exposition of Genesis 1–3
or Mark’s Gospel or the early chapters of Romans to lead someone
to himself? Non-Christians around us have been steeped in sin and
Satan’s deception for a lifetime; are we surprised if God normally

23 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


takes longer than a couple of minutes to undermine Satan’s lies and
bring the sinner under conviction as he lays out his creation intent
for marriage and sexuality, for work and supreme allegiance to him,
for repentance and faith? We have all joined in Adam’s rebellion
heartily (not reluctantly) and completely (not partially). We may
need to be made thoroughly aware of the responsibilities to our
Creator that we have ignored and even denied.
     Through expositional preaching, non-Christians need to be
instructed in the truth and taught how God views his world—in-
cluding them. They need to be challenged to rethink their priorities,
their work, their family, and most of all their own lives. They need to
be rediagnosed by God’s Word. Both Christians and non-Christians
need to hear God’s Word expounded.

THE NEED FOR THE GOOD NEWS:
EVANGELISTIC PREACHING
The need for evangelistic preaching is obvious, too. The Apostle
Paul’s riveting argument in Romans 10 is founded on the notion that
“faith comes from hearing the message” (10:17). Those who have not
yet heard the gospel of Jesus Christ need to do so. This is straightfor-
ward. There are, however, some important matters to consider about
evangelistic preaching that are not so straightforward.

What Is an Evangelistic Sermon?
For one thing, some people have a mistaken notion of what consti-
tutes an evangelistic address. Some think that evangelistic sermons
must be histrionic. Others assume quite the opposite—that, in fact,
your whole goal in commending the gospel to your visitor deter-
mines that the evangelistic sermon must be seeker sensitive. Still
others think that any good evangelistic message will be packed with
the latest apologetic arguments. But evangelistic preaching is not

24 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


married to any certain style. Others feel that evangelistic sermons
must be preached in the setting of a week-long mission, a revival, or
a Sunday evening (as the tradition was in many evangelical churches
in Britain in the twentieth century). But surely the setting does not
determine what is truly an evangelistic sermon.
     Still others feel that any sermon that is met with conversions
must be an evangelistic sermon. And conversely, they may suggest, any
that is not cannot have been truly evangelistic. But surely the results
do not adequately evaluate whether we have been faithful. And still
others may feel that if they intend a message to be evangelistic, then it
must have been so. But, of course, messages are not truly evangelistic
merely because the preacher’s motive was that the sermons should be.
Our intentions are not always realized in our sermons.
     Whether a sermon is truly evangelistic is determined not by our
motives or the results afterward or by the setting or the style, the time or
the place. One thing and one thing alone determines whether a sermon
can properly be said to be evangelistic, and that is its content. Is the evan-
gel—the good news—present? Even better, is it presented forcefully and
with heart to sinners in need? This question of content is above all the
question that determines whether a sermon is truly evangelistic.

Who Needs to Hear Evangelistic Sermons?
Another matter that confuses us in our evangelistic efforts is that
it is not always obvious who the non-Christians are. Sometimes
it is not obvious to them. Perhaps one person is fairly moral, even
religious. Perhaps they are even a member of the church. The great
Puritan preacher William Perkins said that generally churches
have “both believers and unbelievers. This is the typical situation
in our congregations.”3 Such unregenerate members may never see

3   William Perkins, The Art of Prophesying (1606; repr. Edinburgh: Banner of Truth, 1996), 62.


25 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


themselves as needing to hear the gospel declared and explained, and
yet they may exist for years in the soundest of churches unconvicted
of their sins and unconverted in their souls.
     This confusion is compounded when even preachers of the
Word do not realize the people’s state. While those who are called
to preach God’s Word to God’s people should be gifted with above
average discernment, no pastor can look into the human heart as the
Lord Jesus does. There may be those among the apparently com-
mitted in a congregation who are actually self-righteous or, as the
Puritans used to name them, “gospel hypocrites.”
     The famous example in Puritan literature was created by John
Bunyan in a character called “Mr. Badman.” Bunyan’s fictitious
hypocrite lived an apparently virtuous life, knowing some involve-
ment with his church, and he even died with a clear conscience! As
Bunyan said at the end of the first part of Pilgrim’s Progress, “I saw
that there was a way to hell, even from the gates of heaven, as well as
from the City of Destruction!” Preachers need to be confident of this
and so realize that the gospel is always in need of being proclaimed.
     Sound evangelistic preaching, however, is also helpful for Chris-
tians. Whose heart has yet fully appreciated the goodness of God to
us in providing for our salvation in Christ? Who of those hearing
the next sermon you preach has fully comprehended God’s love for
us in Christ? Whose gratitude is as full as it can be? Whose hope as
sharp? Whose faith as strong? All of this can happen by searching
presentations of the gospel through preaching that exposes God’s
Word. Passages that explore God’s holiness, contemplate his rights,
consider our purpose, trace out our sin, meditate on Christ, delin-
eate various aspects of his work, tease out the nature of faith, or
expose false repentance—all of these can be the subject of sermons

26 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


that, by exposing God’s people to God’s Word, not only hold out
the gospel to those who never heard it, but build up those who have.
      Expositional preaching should be, by its very nature, evange-
listic and edifying. John Piper defines preaching itself simply as “the
heralding of the good news by a messenger sent by God.”4 Good
evangelistic preaching should always edify God’s people merely by
carefully holding out God’s gospel.
      Such evangelistic preaching is important for Christians to
hear because it helps us to better understand the gospel we claim
to believe. And along with our head’s understanding, our heart’s
appreciation grows and deepens. What believer would not profit
from having a clearer grasp of God’s holiness, his coming judgment,
human purpose, our sin, Christ’s person and work, or the required
response of repentance and faith?
      What results from such a growing gospel understanding among
Christians? There are several results, but let me name just three.
      First, a growing gospel understanding among Christians leads
us to praise. God desires that we praise him. His Word is full of
encouragements for us and even exhortations to us to praise him
(Deut. 8:10; Ps. 33; Isa. 12:4; Acts 15:14; Rom. 9:17; 1 Pet. 2:9).
Eternity will not be long enough for us to adequately thank God
or to explore the fullness of the reasons we should praise him. Pro-
claiming his gospel displays his character to us at its most gracious
and loving point. As Samuel Crossman’s beautiful hymn declares:

       My song is love unknown,
       My Savior’s love to me;
       Love to the loveless shown,
       That they might lovely be.

4   John Piper, The Supremacy of God in Preaching (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1990), 27.


27 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


    Crossman goes on to detail ways in which God loved us, none
more poignant than this observation:

      In life, no house, no home
      My Lord on earth might have;
      In death, no friendly tomb,
      But what a stranger gave.
      What may I say?
      Heaven was his home;
      But mine the tomb
      Wherein he lay.


      A growing understanding of our Savior’s love for us causes us
to praise God.
      Another result of such gospel-oriented evangelistic preaching in
the lives of Christian hearers should be an increasing integration of
biblical knowledge with their everyday lives. As the gospel is explored
and explained, as implications are drawn out and false conclusions
confuted, the gospel becomes more woven into the warp and woof of
our lives. It forms the filter through which we understand the world.
It acts as a protection from sin and a guide to holiness.
      A healthy appreciation for God’s holiness causes us to grow in
our respect for God and in our esteem for his abilities. We may defend
the inerrancy of his Word not based upon a high conception of the
human authors, but rather based upon a high conception of God and
of his ability to create creatures who can understand what he reveals.
      A growing understanding of our having been made in God’s
image may help us to understand how good can be produced by non-
Christian artists or novelists or business owners or scientists, or how
non-Christians can have good marriages and good homes. We are not
baffled by that. We understand that we are made in the image of God.

28 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


      Increased appreciation for the gospel may result in a deepened
grasp of the offensiveness of sin to God and therefore in our living
more holy lives. We could proceed through every head of theology as
it flows from the gospel and consider how a greater understanding of
each one of these causes the gospel to stand in more immediate con-
nection with every thought we have during the day and with every
aspect of our lives.
      If this is the case, then a third result of such expositional
preaching that faithfully points to the gospel is that our own per-
sonal evangelism should become more pervasive and more natural
in our lives. If we clearly see the connection between the gospel and
the worldview espoused in this movie or that editorial, this decision
your child makes or that ethical dilemma your friend at work faces,
then the gospel comes much more naturally into our conversations.
      Instead of abruptly changing topics with a non-Christian friend,
such equipped Christians can see how the gospel is the topic at the
root of the matter being discussed. Certainly one could caricature
such readiness with the gospel in conversation, but a congregation
well-instructed in the gospel and its implications in our daily lives
should be a congregation that evangelizes much more naturally and
therefore regularly.
      For all these reasons, and more, it is both biblically right and
practically helpful for pastors regularly to preach expositional ser-
mons evangelistically to their own congregations. Both Christians
and non-Christians need to hear the gospel preached.

HOW TO PREACH EXPOSITIONAL SERMONS
EVANGELISTICALLY
The question people may ask is, How can a sermon be both faith-
fully evangelistic and faithfully expositional? Perhaps the questioner
would understand how that can be the case with certain passages

29 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


as the text, but can every text of Scripture be expounded with the
expectation that the gospel will be central to that exposition? It is
the conviction of this author that the answer to that question is a
definite yes!
      Little has been written on preaching that is both evangelis-
tic and expositional, but surely it is in the nature of good biblical
preaching to be both. Expositional preaching can be the best evan-
gelistic preaching. Who can have heard or read the preaching of
James Montgomery Boice through the early chapters of Genesis or
Romans or of D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones in Ephesians 2 and not agree
with that sentiment?
      Though the argument is not made in this article that exposition
and evangelism are synonymous—nor even quite inseparable—it
should be clear that they are normally deeply related and that great
benefit should flow to the hearers when the message has both expo-
sition and the gospel carefully integrated.
      How precisely can we preach such biblical, evangelistic sermons?
That is the topic of the remainder of this article. But before we turn to
such practical matters that may help us to do this, we must first check
our own understanding of what the message of the Bible is.
      As those who handle the Word of God publicly, preachers and
teachers must understand that the whole Bible is gospel-shaped.
The stories in Genesis and Exodus, the wisdom of the Psalms, the
warnings and prophecies of Isaiah and Ezekiel, the parables of Jesus,
and the letters of Paul—all are gospel-shaped. They contain and
convey the great themes of who God is, why he made us, how we
failed, what God did in Christ, and the repentance and faith we are
now called to in light of all this. In our preaching, we should not
merely insert a gospel outline in an otherwise moralistic message
from the Old Testament; rather, we need to understand how God’s

30 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


law drives us to God’s gospel. And we need to do that in the teaching
of every passage of Scripture.
     With that understanding of the Bible in place, expositional ser-
mons much more naturally become conduits for the gospel. Making
sure we have that understanding is the first practical step we can
make to bring our expositions and our evangelism together.
     Assuming this gospel-shaped understanding of the Bible, there
are a number of particular ways our own expositional preaching
ministry can be more faithfully evangelistic.

Accommodation
The main weekly Lord’s Day gathering of a church is primarily for
Christians, not non-Christians. Therefore we should deliberately
set about to plan the service—including our preaching—with our
primary end as the glorification of God through the edification of
his church. Certainly evangelism can be a part of that—as I argue
above—but it is never the main point. Our expositional sermons are
preached to feed the flock entrusted to our care.
     Of course, when you preach well expositionally, you necessarily
preach evangelistically. This is why we so often find the ministries of
great expositional preachers so blessed evangelistically. God honors
the preaching of his Word. We realize that our Sunday morning
congregations are not stationary Billy Graham rallies. They are not
audiences to be lured and kept, but congregations to be shepherded
and fed. And yet, as we preach God’s Word faithfully, hypocrites will
find the new birth. And non-Christians will see the change in their
family and friends, and they, too, will, by God’s grace, inevitably come.
     Therefore it is appropriate for us to take into account the pres-
ence of non-Christians in our services. Our services can be properly
sensitive and friendly to non-Christians without calibrating every-
thing to the level of a first-time visitor. When we gather as a church,

31 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


we gather as a family in need of sustenance. Part of what we do
during that time will be quite naturally to pray for and preach to
those who are not yet Christians. And in doing that we should use
language they can understand.
     We should remind people occasionally why we do what we do
in the service. We should preach from a translation that people can
understand. We may even explain from time-to-time what chapter
and verse numbers are and other things that those of us who have
been Christians for years take for granted. But no believer is ever
hurt by having the truth explained to them briefly and simply, even
as no unbeliever is hurt by having Scripture preached powerfully on
points they do not fully understand. When the church all around is
helped, they too will be helped.

Title
Even sermon titles can be provocative for drawing people to con-
sider their lives and to consider coming to hear the sermon. Coaxing
interest need not compromise content. You could entitle a series in
Exodus “A New Start.” You could give the following names to a series
through 1 John called “Basic Questions”:
     • “What Do I Do with Sin?” (1 John 1:1–2:2)
     • “How Can I Know That I Have Eternal Life?”
       (1 John 2:3–27)
     • “What Is True Love?” (1 John 2:28–3:24)
     • “How Can I Face Judgment?” (1 John 4)
     • “What Is Faith?” (1 John 5)
     Such titles are both faithful to the content of the texts to be ex-
pounded and, at the same time, help to call attention to the relevance
of the content for those who are not yet Christians. They should
naturally be of interest to non-Christians and Christians alike. Just

32 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


because your non-Christian friend is not interested in a series of
sermons advertised as being “on 1 John” does not mean he or she
would not be interested in hearing sermons addressing the matters
John addressed in those letters. That is what the titles listed above
are intended to do—to expose the content of the text and to suggest
something of the way it might intersect with their lives.
      Even the events of our lives conspire to create interest in God’s
Word. Titles can reflect such interest. Times of cultural interest in
Christianity provided by crises (like the events of September 11,
2001), unusual events (like the new millennium), or regular seasons
(Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year’s, Easter) can be well used for
gospel ends. With a little thought, relevant and even provocative
titles can be provided for advertisements.

Introductions
Our sermon introductions, too, can evidence the evangelistic intent
that we have in expounding God’s Word. We can begin our sermons
expectantly, but not wrongly presuming the interest of those gath-
ered. Certainly the faithful members of the congregation should be
interested, but they are not always. Some will be distracted, others
hardened, others uninformed, and still others weary. All of these will
be helped if they are first told why they should listen to the sermon
before they are actually made to do it. Reminding ourselves of why
and how the doctrinal center of our text is important is a useful ex-
ercise in an introduction.
     And if introductions are so useful for our Christian hearers,
they are certainly no less so for our non-Christian hearers. Intro-
ductions that highlight and seek to demonstrate the relevance, to
carefully delineate the difficult points, to admit uncertainties on a
popular topic, all serve to encourage hearers to give their careful at-
tention to the sermon.

33 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


Doctrinal Exposition
Good evangelistic expositions should clearly explain the gospel itself
to people. While the whole Bible—and every text in it—is gospel-
shaped, it is still useful to have some time in a sermon where the
good news itself is clearly and simply stated. Paul did this at the
beginning of 1 Corinthians 15. We, too, can follow this practice.
Consider having some simple explanation, like this one:

      This holy Creator made us for himself. We have sinned and separated our-
      selves from him. But we will give an account to him. We may ignore him for
      a time; we will never avoid him forever. At that accounting, he will rightly
      judge us for our sins. His mercy that we’ve enjoyed to that time will end;
      his justice will begin. Our only hope is in what he has done in Christ. God
      became a man, lived a perfect life, and took on himself all the sins of all
      those who would ever turn from their sins and trust in him. In his death on
      the cross he bore the sins of all his people. Christ the plaintiff became the
      punished for us, the guilty people. He became our substitute. And he calls us
      now to recognize in his resurrection God’s acceptance of this sacrifice, that
      his justice toward those in Christ is exhausted, and to repent of our sins and
      trust in Christ and so find forgiveness and new life.


     Evangelistic expository sermons should include some simple
statement like this, perhaps explaining one or more of these ideas at
length, depending on the topic of the text being expounded. A clear
summary can add luster to all the other aspects of the gospel brought
out in the text. Like the rays of a beautiful sunset, they can go back
over the territory covered in the sermon, causing us to review it all in
the fresh, warm brilliance of God’s self-giving and saving love for us
in Christ. When we do this, we hold forth the good news.
     When we hold forth the good news in our preaching, we
should particularly beware of presenting this gospel as an option

34 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


to be exercised for the betterment of sinners’ lives. After all, what
would a carnal person consider better? Leading questions like “Are
you scared of death?” or “Do you want happiness?” or “Would you
like to know the meaning of your life?” are all well intentioned, and
any of them may be used by God’s Spirit to convict someone and to
lead to their conversion. But such questions may also be answered
by a simple no. To use such questions as if they are the starting point
for those considering the gospel is to make it sound all too optional.
      To speak personally for a moment, when I am in a situation in
which I am called upon to preach, as Baxter said, “as a dying man to
dying men,” I do not care if my hearers are scared of death, wanting
happiness, or searching for meaning in life; I know that they will die
and stand before God to give an account of their lives. Furthermore,
I know that they will fail in their attempt to justify themselves, and I
know that God will therefore rightly condemn them to an eternal hell.
      As one who shares their common weakness and depravity, my
sympathy with them compels me to tell them the truth, and that is not
dependent upon their passing interest or my ability to find the right
marketing introduction to snag them. They are in fact accountable to
God. He is their Creator, and he will just as certainly be their judge.
      So I find verses like Mark 8:38 useful, where Jesus taught, “If
anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful
generation, the Son of Man will be ashamed of him when he comes
in his Father’s glory with the holy angels.” Or Paul’s statement in
Acts 17:31: God “has set a day when he will judge the world with
justice by the man he has appointed. He has given proof of this to
all men by raising him from the dead.” Or again, Romans 3:19–20:
“Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are
under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole
world held accountable to God. Therefore no one will be declared

35 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


righteous in his sight by observing the law; rather, through the law
we become conscious of sin.” Or Hebrews 9:27: “Man is destined to
die once, and after that to face judgment.”
     These verses underscore the inevitability of God’s judging us,
regardless of our interest in God at any given point in our lives.
This demand—rather than a marketer’s appeal—is to be the basis
of the evangelistic call in our sermons. Our gospel sermons are not
to sound like the solicitations of a sales representative, but the sum-
mons of a judge.

Illustration
Good evangelistic illustrations can fall short of containing the whole
gospel in them. Existentialist literature well captures some of the emp-
tiness and pointlessness of life without God. Popular novels, films,
editorials, and political situations can expose hypocrisy, greed, shat-
tered illusions, responsibility, and so many other themes nearly related
to the gospel. Use of such material can help our non-Christian listener
to consider what we are saying, just as the Greeks listened to Paul in
Acts 17 as he quoted their own inscriptions and poets. We all tend to
listen better to someone when we think they understand where we
are coming from. Our non-Christian friends are no different in this.
      One particularly appropriate kind of illustration of biblical
truth is the personal testimony. Certainly a testimony of “what Jesus
has done for me” may not include a clear presentation of the gos-
pel; but just as certainly it may, and it will if we have that in view.
Include in your sermons examples of gospel truths being brought
home in people’s lives—whether at conversion or some later point.
The vividness of such illustration can help a salient point to live on
in someone’s mind. It can explain things by analogy in ways that no
amount of close reasoning will do. God is glorified by testimonies of
his grace. Illustrate it in your preaching.

36 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


Application
And, of course, our applications can be evangelistic in a number of
ways. Even the very implications we draw out from the text can help
to expose the shallow righteousness of this world and of human-
made religious solutions. Expositions that expose the insufficiency
of answers apart from Christ can be as useful in setting forth the
gospel as a doctor’s diagnosis can for compelling someone to take a
prescribed medicine. As they say, “a good diagnosis is half the cure.”
      Christian preachers should be especially careful to speak the
truth about sin. Our sermons are never to be negotiated finally by
what we think our hearers can emotionally bear, let alone by what
we think non-Christian hearers in our community would agree with.
The goal of our sermons is not to enhance our hearer’s self-esteem,
but to see them inherit eternal salvation. Lovingly exposing sin is a
necessary part of our call to truth telling. Such exposing will often
be initially unpopular. A sinner in the flesh will never agree that he
or she should be convicted until the Holy Spirit does his convincing
and convicting work.
      We should proclaim the truth about human sin, with the humil-
ity that is appropriate when one sinner speaks to others about such
matters. We should proclaim the truth about human sin as surely
as we hope our own doctors tell us the truth about our own health,
particularly when the news is bad and most particularly when it is
dire. As the ancient Greek proverb put it, the opposite of a friend is
not an enemy, it is a flatterer. When we flatter our hearers we help no
one, least of all those who most need it.
      Exploring the truth about sin, tracing its ways in our hearts,
and exposing the truth about God’s verdict on it and its ruinous
end is one of the most important functions Christian preaching
has. We must commit ourselves to faithfully expounding the Word,

37 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


especially in those places where it would correct or convict us. When
we go wrong is when we most need to be put right. Politeness is a
poor substitute for honesty. If that is true in passing human relation-
ships, how much truer is it in our eternal relationship with God?
     Furthermore, something in even the most depraved human
heart witnesses to the truth of God’s revelation of our sins. God’s
image in us, our conscience, cries out in every heart, even if its cry is
often muted or inconsistent. We must go into our pulpits not try-
ing to win our non-Christian friends’ approval but their souls. God’s
Spirit will use the faithful proclamation of the truth to do that.
     One method that I find helpful in preparing to apply Scriptures
both carefully and evangelistically is to make a grid, with rows going
across for each point of the sermon and with columns going down.
The columns help me to consider, in turn, what is unique in salva-
tion history in this text, what the application of the text is to the
non-Christian and for our public lives in society, how it is fulfilled
in Christ, what the application is to the individual Christian and for
us as a local church.
     While there is rarely time to work out all these applications for
each point in any one sermon, the exercise of carefully considering
implications and applications across the board like this has the effect
of helping me to hear the Scripture as a non-Christian friend might
hear it and so to pray about which parts to lean on and to press home
in the sermon. It is always good before preaching to review the ser-
mon notes prayerfully in order to consider where the gospel points
of human need and divine provision might best be pressed home.
     Yet in evangelistic expositional preaching, the gospel should be
presented not merely by means of some slender connection I happen
to notice (e.g., an imagined connection between the scarlet cord in
Joshua 2 and 6 and the color of Christ’s blood) but by the structure

38 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


of the story itself (e.g., Rahab believes the truth of God’s Word told
to her by the spies and so effectively repents and believes and is thus
incorporated savingly into the people of God).
     In this way, the non-Christian is helped to see the unified
testimony of God’s Word and saving actions across the centuries,
all pointing to the non-Christian’s need and to God’s provision in
Christ. The thoroughness of pressing home a passage, along with its
implications for several different areas of life, exposes the shallow-
ness of life without Christ and the richness of the life that God calls
us to. We must apply the text evangelistically.

Invitation
No exposition of God’s Word should ever be given without an invi-
tation to respond. More than an invitation, really a demand should
come in the sermon that all those listening submit themselves to
God, confess their sins and his lordship, repent from their sins, and
trust in Christ for salvation.
      In this age, words from our holy Creator to sinful creatures like
us must always include the imperatives repent and believe. How else
can we faithfully represent any portion of Scripture if we do not
reflect the saving purposes of God?
      Part of our inviting people to respond can be an offer to speak
with them after the service at some designated place or time. It could
be encouraging them to speak to those around them or to some Chris-
tian friends. We can offer them literature or a series of Bible studies.
      It is best to avoid any kind of invitation that would lead them
to think that in responding to our invitation they have responded
savingly to Christ. The confusion and carnality that reigns in so
many evangelical churches today shows the disaster that such well-
intentioned mistakes work in people’s lives.

39 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


      Nevertheless, with cautions duly noted, we must call people
earnestly and urgently to respond to the gospel. To do anything less
is to default on the very call that God has given his ministers to
proclaim his Word.
      Here it must be said that if we do not in our normal, everyday
lives have a heart for the lost, there is little chance that our sermons
will burn with the evangelistic passion that so becomes the gospel.
We must be impassioned by the gospel that has called us and that we
are now called to proclaim.

CONCLUSION
These then are some of the elements that will help us to preach our
expositional sermons with evangelism in view.
     We should understand the gospel-centeredness of the whole
Bible. We should take account of the presence of non-Christians—
known or unknown to us—among us. We can announce that we will
preach on topics that might interest them (even when the sermons
themselves are straightforward expositions of Hebrews or Malachi).
We can introduce the sermons themselves in ways that help to show
the relevance of the Scriptures to common concerns. We can clearly
state the gospel, illustrate it movingly and personally, pray to apply it
searchingly, and clearly and earnestly call for a response.
     In all of these ways our expositional sermons can hold forth
the gospel.
     One reason I can be so confident of the power of evangelistic
expositional sermons is a series of messages I heard one summer
when I was in college. I was at the camp of a college fellowship, and
James Montgomery Boice preached expositionally through the first
few chapters of Genesis and then through the first few chapters of
Romans. The messages were some of the most powerful expositions
I had yet heard. The Word was unfolded, and the very clarity of its

40 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Evangelistic Expository Preaching


presentation made the already-glorious truths more glorious still.
The darkness of our sins and the depth of God’s mercy had never
been more obvious to me.
       At the same time, these messages were some of the clearest ex-
planations of the gospel I had ever been given. The cross of Christ
and the necessity of repentance and faith could not have been clearer.
There, in the middle of those thick Bible expositions were some of
the most powerful evangelistic sermons that my Southern Baptist,
revival-going ears had ever heard. God’s grace was clearly magnifi-
cent. The intervening decades have not dimmed my memory of the
happy marriage of evangelism and exposition in those sermons.
       And, in God’s good providence, I have many other times been
blessed by hearing sermons that are both evangelistic and exposi-
tional. I would like to think that with his help that is how I, too,
have preached. And, if you are still reading this article, my guess is
that you, too, may have done the same. If we do not preach as well as
the giants, we can at least preach the same message and to the same
end—that God may be glorified in the salvation of sinners and in
the edifying of his church.
       If you are a preacher that still has questions about this, the next
time you try to preach evangelistically without preaching exposition-
ally, consider how your message might be strengthened, your points
illustrated, your passions stoked, your framework deepened by
preaching to the same group from one passage of Scripture. Would
a particular text be useful for your hearers to try to come to grips
with, to understand, and to remember? Would such expositional
preaching be an enhancement of your evangelism?
       And even more, the next time you preach expositionally, con-
sider what it might be like to do it without preaching evangelistically.
Can you really explore the themes of the law in the Old Testament

41 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


without going to the gospel? Can you understand David’s delight in
God and his Word apart from Christ? Can you present Isaiah’s hope
or Ezekiel’s vision without an understanding of what God would
do in Christ? Can you expound the teaching of Jesus or the letters
of John without clearly talking of God’s holiness, our sin, Christ’s
sacrifice, and our needed response of repentance and faith?
     Often, to evangelize well will entail carefully expounding God’s
Word. Carefully expounding God’s Word will always entail evange-
lizing. Neither can be neglected; both must be done in our preaching
if we are to preach God’s Word to God’s people. While one could
point to many books on preaching, let me suggest three: Edmund P.
Clowney, Preaching and Biblical Theology (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1961; repr. Phillipsburg, N.J.: P&R Publishing, 1979); Graeme
Goldsworthy, Preaching the Whole Bible as Christian Scripture
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2000); and John Piper, The Supremacy of
God in Preaching (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1990).




42 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
            A Biblical Case
      for Expositional Preaching
                       MIKE BULLMORE




What is expositional preaching? A sermon is expositional if its con-
tent and intent are controlled by the content and intent of a particular
passage of Scripture. The preacher says what the passage says, and he
intends for his sermon to accomplish in his listeners exactly what God
is seeking to accomplish through the chosen passage of his Word.
      Preacher, imagine God sitting in the congregation as you
preach. What will be the expression on his face? Will it say, “That’s
not at all what I was getting at with that passage.” Or will it say, “Yes,
that’s exactly what I intended.”
      The biblical case for expositional preaching starts with the
connection between the gift the ascended Christ has given to the
church in pastor-teachers (Eph. 4:11) and the biblical injunction
for pastors-teachers to “preach the word” (2 Tim. 4:2). Those who
preach should preach their Bibles.
      Perhaps the best place to begin demonstrating the legitimacy
of identifying preaching and preaching the word is the book of Acts.
In Acts, the phrase “the Word of God” is regular shorthand for the
substance of the apostolic preaching. In Acts 6:2, for example, the
apostles say, “It is not right that we should give up the preaching
of the word of God” (see also Acts 12:24; 13:5, 46; 17:13; 18:11.)
The phrase also frequently appears as “the Word of the Lord” (8:25,
13:44; 15:35-36; et. al.) and not infrequently it is shortened to “the
word” (cf. 4:29; 8:4; 11:19). In the book of Acts, there is a clear and

43 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
1. EXPOSITIONAL PREACHING


consistent identification between the apostolic preaching and the
phrase “the Word of God.”
      While the substance of the apostolic preaching was the good
news of reconciliation with God through Christ Jesus, that mes-
sage was delivered and explained almost invariably by means of
an exposition of Old Testament Scripture. So preaching in New
Testament times involved the preaching of “the Word of God,” and
an essential component of such preaching was the exposition of
the Old Testament. This in turn leads us to the conclusion that
the Old Testament Scriptures must be included in our concep-
tion of “the Word” to be preached, a conclusion confirmed by both
the direct (e.g., 2 Tim 3:16; Rom. 3:2) and indirect claims (e.g.,
Rom. 15:4) of the New Testament.
      So this “Word” is the Word about Jesus, as anticipated in the
Old Testament and now explained in the apostolic preaching. This
is the word that is “spoken” (Acts 4:29), “proclaimed” (13:5), and to
be “received” (17:11) as “the Word of God.” This same identifica-
tion is maintained throughout Paul’s letters. Without hesitation, he
calls the message he proclaims “the Word of God” (2 Cor. 2:17, 4:2;
1 Thes. 2:13) or simply “the Word” (Gal. 6:6).
      Even in the context of Paul’s charge to Timothy to “preach the
Word” there is confirmation of this identification between preach-
ing and preaching the Word of God. Timothy would have known
immediately what “Word” Paul meant. As Timothy’s biography
highlights, it surely included both the “sacred writings” and the ap-
ostolic message—”what you have learned and have firmly believed
knowing from whom you learned it” (2 Tim. 3:10–17).
      The conclusion we are to draw from all of this is that the “word”
we are to preach is the body of truth consisting of the Old Testa-
ment Scriptures and the apostolic teaching regarding Christ—i.e.

44 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Biblical Case for Expositional Preaching


the New Testament. Thus, identifying the “Word” with our Bibles is
appropriate. This is what those commissioned as “pastor-teachers” are to
teach. Our job is to proclaim “the Word” which God has spoken, pre-
served in Scripture, and entrusted to us. The spiritual life of God’s
people depends on this Word (Deut. 8:3). That is why a young pas-
tor is charged to “devote yourself to the public reading of Scripture,
to exhortation, to teaching” (1 Tim. 4:13). If this charge makes any
claim on us today, and it does, then the source of our preaching is to
be entirely coextensive with our Bibles.
      What will this look like? In our sermon preparation, it will
look like taking defined passages of God’s Word and studying them
carefully so that we “rightly handle the Word of truth.” In the pul-
pit, it will look like the picture we see in Nehemiah 8:8: “They read
from the book . . . clearly, and they gave the sense, so that the people
understood the reading.” God has both purposed and promised to
use this kind of preaching to accomplish one of his great aims—the
gathering and building up of his people.




45 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. Gospel
   Doctrine
WHAT IS IT?
Gospel doctrine addresses who God is, who we are as sinners, and
what God has done to save those who repent of their sin and trust
in him.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• The Bible teaches that God created the world, and that he is holy,
  faithful, loving, and sovereign (Gen. 1:1; Lev. 21:8; Ex. 34:6–7;
  John 5:20; 1 John 4:10, 19; Isa. 45:7-9; Eph. 1:11).
• The Bible also teaches that man was made in God’s image in
  order to obey God’s commands and enjoy perfect fellowship
  forever (Gen 1:26–27, 2:17; Psalm 19:7–9; Rev. 2:7).
• Rather than obey God, however, man sinned, death entered
  the world, and all came under condemnation before God
  (Rom. 5:12–14).
• Yet the Bible makes clear that God loved a sinful people and
  sent his only Son to live, die, and rise in order to forgive any
  who repent of their sin and trust in him (Gal. 2:16; Rom. 5:1–2;
  2 Cor. 5:21).
• The entire Bible and all its doctrine points to the person and
  work of Jesus Christ (Luke 24:44–47; John 5:39–40).

WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Gospel doctrine is important because there is no other way for man
to be forgiven of his sins and receive eternal life but through Jesus
Christ (Acts 4:12).

46 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                  Jesus Cared
                 About Doctrine
                    SAMUEL PARKISON




There are few things that make me grumpier than a false dichotomy.
They put a queasy feeling in my stomach; they make me groan with
vexation. Examples of cringe-worthy false dichotomies are all too
often tolerated in evangelical circles: Should we revel in the grace
of Christ or pursue personal holiness? Should we tell the truth or
practice compassion? Are pastors called to feed the sheep or fend
off wolves? Should pastors teach on biblical headship in marriage
or protect the abused in their flocks?
     We could, of course, go on, but I shall spare you the assault
of a longer list, lest I trigger you with the same spiritual indiges-
tion these examples give me. There is, however, one particular false
dichotomy I wish to address, and it is by far one of the worst. Of all
the examples to make my countenance fall, none have the potential
to ruin my day like this old chestnut: Should we care about doctrine
or should we simply follow Christ? Another way to put this silly false
choice—and, sadly, one that has the veneer of scholarly respectabil-
ity—is: should we base our Christianity around Christ and the Gospels
or Paul and the epistles?
     The assumption behind this choice feeds on a kind of Hegelian
view of historical evolution: the Gospels present a simple Christ, who
taught a simple message, who led a simple band of simple disciples.
At some point, the water was muddied by Paul, who complicated an
elementary way of living with heady doctrine and polluted a pure

47 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


religion with philosophical hair-splitting. Paul, so the myth goes,
turned a street-smart carpenter into God. And while this narrative
is rightly rejected on its nose by most evangelicals, some still assume
a lite version of it when they pit the theology of Paul against the
practical instructions of Jesus.
      The problem, of course, is that such a conception is false on
both accounts; Paul is imminently practical, and the words of Christ
are doctrinally deep to a breath-taking degree. It is the latter point
that I pick up here. And while it’s tempting to simply say, “Every
word of Scripture is a red-letter word in the sense that Christ speaks
to his Bride—and reveals the glory of the Trinity—through the
Spirit-inspired words of Scripture, including Paul,” and rest my case
there, I shall assume nothing and will gladly pick up the challenge.
If we restrict ourselves simply to the words and actions of Christ
found in the Gospels, do we see the Lord Jesus enforcing a concern
for doctrine?
      The answer is yes. Now let me explain.

JESUS INSTRUCTS THE DOCTRINALLY
IGNORANT AND CORRECTS THE
DOCTRINALLY MISLED
That Jesus most certainly did concern himself with sound doctrine
is well evidenced by the many times we see him instructing the doc-
trinally ignorant and correcting the doctrinally misled. Consider,
for example, Christ’s teaching in the Gospel of John. With his many
“truly, truly” statements, Christ reveals that he is the divine doctri-
nal instructor ( John 1:51; 3:3–5; 3:11; 5:19, 24; 6:26, 32, 47, 53;
8:34, 51; 10:1, 7; 12:24; 13:16, 20–21, 38; 14:12; 16:20, 23; 21:18).
Perhaps the most iconic example of Jesus in this role is found in
Christ’s conversation with Nicodemus in John 3:1–21. Whatever
you make of this conversation, one of the striking details is found

48 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Jesus Cared About Doctrine


in Jesus’s exasperated question, “Are you the teacher of Israel and yet
you do not understand these things?” (3:10) Admittedly, it may not
have been easy doctrinal work for Nicodemus to connect the dots
between Israel’s Scriptures (specifically, Ezekiel 36:25–27) and all
this talk of the new birth, but then again, if anyone could have been
expected to pick up on Jesus’s teaching here, surely it would have
been “the” teacher of Israel, Nicodemus himself. And yet here we
see Nicodemus, the teacher, being taught. Were we to accept the as-
sumption that Jesus cared little for doctrinal instruction, we would
have to insist on the same for Nicodemus—whose vocation was, I
hasten to remind you, doctrinal instruction.
       When we turn to the next page of John’s Gospel, we see Jesus
still instructing the doctrinally ignorant. In this case, the student
is the Samaritan woman at the well, and the topic is, among other
things, fitting worship. He says, “The hour is coming, and is now
here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit
and truth, for the Father is seeking such people to worship him.
God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit
and truth.” Many contemporary expositors take Jesus to be speak-
ing purely about the internal disposition of the worshiper and the
epochal change that was taking place. The Samaritans and the
Jews were disputing over the proper location of worship, and Jesus
comes as the presence of God. The time of restricting worship to
geographical location was forever changed when the Word taber-
nacled with man (cf., John 1:14), and so now the time has come
wherein worshipers worship in “spirit and truth”—or, in sincerity
and knowledge. On the surface, I think this is right, and is by it-
self doctrinal instruction. But even here, the witness of the great
tradition of Christianity would call us to hear in Jesus’s words
an invitation to even deeper dogmatic contemplation. After all,

49 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


“Spirit” and “Truth” are both names Scripture elsewhere (indeed,
even in this very same Gospel) attributes to the second and third
persons of the Trinity. Basil the Great writes,
     If we say that worship offered in the Son (the truth) is worship
offered in the Father’s image, we can say the same about worship
offered in the Spirit since the Spirit in himself reveals the divinity
of the Lord. The Holy Spirit cannot be divided from the Father and
the Son in worship. If you remain outside the Spirit, you cannot
worship at all, and if you are in him you cannot separate him from
God. Light cannot be separated from what it makes visible, and it
is impossible for you to recognize Christ, the image of the invisible
God, unless the Spirit enlightens you.1
     If there is anything to Basil’s insights here, then what Jesus of-
fers in John 4 is more than doctrinal instructions to a Samaritan
woman regarding the proper location of worship. He also offers all
of us doctrinal instructions about communion with the Trinity and
the Trinity’s inseparable operations.
     Another favorite example of Christ’s doctrinal correction is
when Jesus utters to the Sadducees the Pauline-like blunt verdict:
“You are wrong, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the
power of God” (Matt. 22:29). Now, throughout the Gospels we see
Jesus identifying many problems with the Sadducees, but at least
one major problem was doctrinal. The context of this rebuke has
everything to do with an intermural intellectual debate between the
Pharisees and the Sadducees. If we accept the false dichotomy of
caring about doctrine or following the teachings of Jesus, we would
expect our Lord to sidestep the hypothetical question the Saddu-
cees ask about marriage and the resurrection, and simply offer some
sort of “practical” advice. But instead, he tells them in no uncertain

1   Basil of Caesarea, On the Holy Spirit, 26.64.


50 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Jesus Cared About Doctrine


terms that they are doctrinally misled, and he situates his teaching
about the resurrection within the overarching, heavily loaded dog-
matic confession: “He is not the God of the dead, but of the living”
(Matt. 22:32).
     Even Christ’s ethical injunctions are laced through with sig-
nificant doctrinal instruction. Consider, for example, the Sermon on
the Mount. It is, of course, fitting to go to Matthew 5–7 to glean
instructions on right practice, but such instructions must never be
abstracted from their theological context. What we find here is a
description of Kingdom-living, uttered by Israel’s King who was in
the process of inaugurating his kingdom. These ethical instructions
are couched within one massive doctrinal instruction about Jesus
himself: he is founding Yahweh’s kingdom on earth. Those of us who
struggle to see this imposing subtext suffer from deficient imagina-
tions; that we can read Christ’s words in Matthew 5:11–12 and not
be struck by wonder bespeaks a dullness we would do well to shake
ourselves from. “Blessed are you when others revile you and perse-
cute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.
Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for so they
persecuted the prophets before.” Just who is this one for whom we
suffer persecution? Jesus’s answer is: “the same person for whom the
prophets suffered persecution—me.”
     “On my account,” says Jesus, “you will be persecuted, and on my
account, so were the prophets.” Yet were we to travel back in time
and ask the prophets themselves, “on whose account do you suffer
persecution?” they would undoubtedly answer, “Yahweh; the one
God over heaven and earth.” Do we really think Jesus expects for
us to unroll this logic a-doctrinally? Right from the very beginning
of the Sermon on the Mount, Christ offers significant doctrinal
instruction regarding Yahweh, the God of the Old Testament

51 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


prophets: Yahweh has assumed flesh and now speaks authoritatively
in the beatitudes.
      The doctrinal instruction in the Sermon on the Mount doesn’t
stop there. Jesus goes on to assure his listeners that he came not to
“abolish the Law or the Prophets” but to fulfill them (Matt. 5:17–20),
and this creates an inseparable bond between Israel’s Scriptures and
the life and ministry of Christ. To create such a bond without com-
menting on a doctrine of special revelation is quite impossible—God
began to speak through the Law and the Prophets, and according to
Jesus, that very same message is completed in him (cf., Heb. 1:1–2).
Jesus is also making an explicit Christological claim here: if Yahweh
makes a promise, and Christ takes it upon himself to keep that prom-
ise, he cannot but be claiming the divine name for himself.
      And this is just a tiny sampling of the doctrinal instruction
spilling out of the Sermon on the Mount, to say nothing of the
theology proper we learn from taking God the Son’s speech as our
own to address “our Father” in the Lord’s Prayer (Matt. 6:9–13), or
Christ’s lesson on God’s exhaustive providence—even over the birds
of the air and the flowers of the field (Matt. 6:25–34)—or his les-
son on the Father’s paternal character to delight to give good gifts
to his children (Matt. 7:7-11), or his lesson on cosmic judgment
(Matt. 7:15–20)—which apparently hinges on Christ himself know-
ing or not knowing individuals (Matt. 7:21–23). I could keep going.
But make no mistake: Jesus does not shy away from instructing his
people on doctrinal matters.

JESUS IS THEOLOGY
We have to peer deeper, however, because it is not simply that
Christ instructs his disciples on the importance of doctrinal in-
struction. Astonishingly, it is also the case that Christ himself is the
content of this doctrinal instruction! He is the Word made flesh.

52 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Jesus Cared About Doctrine


When the “Word became flesh,” he assumed the role of “exegete
of the Father.” Jesus was not speaking hyperbolically insisting to
Philip that to see Christ is to see the Father ( John 14:9). Gregory
of Nazianzus makes this point when he describes the “Word” as the
“definition” of the Father:

       He is “Word,” because he is related to the Father as word is to mind, not only
       by reason of the undisturbed character of his birth, but also through the
       connection and declaratory function involved in the relationship. One could
       say too, perhaps, that his relationship is that of definition to term defined,
       since “word” has the meaning in Greek of “definition.” He who has known
       the Son (“seen” means “known” in that context) has known the Father.2


      Importantly, the entire event of the incarnation—from Christ’s
spiritual conception to his ascension—is revelatory. This point is
often missed when Christ’s divine and human natures are pitted
against one another. But the point of Christ’s human nature and his
role as revealer of the divine nature are not incommensurate. We
ought to insist on the entire unity of Christ’s person and work “in
the flesh” as a revelation of divine glory. It is not simply the case that
Christ revealed the glory of God when he performed the miraculous.
The entirety of his enfleshed state was doctrinal revelation. This is a
point that Christ himself makes.
      When the disciples wrote about Christ with doctrinal precision
throughout the New Testament, they did nothing else but follow
Christ’s lead. It was Christ himself who insisted that rendering
honor to the Father and rendering honor to the Son were insepa-
rably tied ( John 5:22–23). It was Christ himself who plunged his
listeners—and later, John’s readers—into an ocean of theological

2   Gregory of Nazianzus, Orations 30.20.


53 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


contemplation regarding the doctrine of eternal generation when he
made the breathtaking claim, “For as the Father has life in himself, so
he has granted the Son also to have life in himself” ( John 5:26).
     The notion that Christ is the theological content of Holy
Scripture was not the invention of overactive imaginations in the
apostles or anyone else. Christ himself makes this claim in no uncer-
tain terms (Luke 24:27; John 5:39). It was not for nothing that the
Jews attempted to stone Jesus for claiming equality with God; they
understood him perfectly well when he claimed the divine name of
Yahweh ( John 8:58), or when he said in stark fashion, “I and the
Father are one” ( John 10:30). Throughout his discourse in John
14–16, Jesus offers unparalleled theological instruction regarding
the Triune relations of the Father, Son, and Spirit. And then, if this
weren’t enough, he allows his disciples to eavesdrop on an inter-
trinitarian dialogue, wherein he reveals, among other things, that
the man Christ Jesus, by virtue of his divine nature, shares an eternal
glory with the Father, a glory which predates the world ( John 17:24).

CONCLUSION
The doctrine we read about later in the New Testament is an elabo-
ration on the doctrine Jesus teaches (and the doctrine Jesus is) in the
Gospels. He is their content, in a way that is completely harmonious
with him being his own content during his earthly ministry. That
is, the doctrinal emphasis in the rest of the New Testament is an
unfolding of what Christ himself promises in John 16:4b–15. Here,
he promises the arrival of the Holy Spirit, who will “guide you into
all truth, for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he
hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to
come” ( John 16:13). The Spirit will glorify Jesus when he takes what
is Jesus’s and declares it to his disciples ( John 16:14).

54 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Jesus Cared About Doctrine


     So, what is this content of Christ’s that the Spirit will declare?
What makes up this Christ-glorifying information that the Spirit
will communicate upon his arrival? What exactly is Christ’s “mine”
here? Answer: “all that the Father has” ( John 16:15). Any attempt to
make sense of such loaded statements without doctrine is a fool’s er-
rand. Jesus wants us to think hard about the divine essence he shares
with the Father and the Spirit here in this passage and elsewhere. He
wants us to be a doctrinal people.
     When the Spirit inspired the apostles to write their many
Christ-exalting, doctrinally-heavy epistles, Christ was making
good on this very promise in John 16. This means that when we pit
doctrine against devotion to Christ, we pit Christ against himself.
Any contrast we see between the “simple” teachings of Jesus and the
doctrinal teachings of Paul is more imagined than real. In truth, the
teachings of Christ cannot but eventuate in the teachings of Paul,
and the teachings of Paul are nothing without the teachings of
Christ. What God has joined together, let not man separate.




55 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                        What Is
                      the Gospel?
                        GREG GILBERT




There has been much conversation in evangelicalism recently about
how Christians should define the gospel—whether we should say
that the gospel is purely the message that sinners can be forgiven of
sin through repentance and faith in the crucified Christ, or whether
it is something broader.
       The conversation has gotten pointed, if not heated, at times,
with those in one camp saying that those in the other camp are being
“reductionistic” about the gospel, and those in that camp retorting
that their accusers are actually diluting the gospel and distracting
the church from its God-given mission.
       It seems to me that we can untangle some of the confusion by
making some careful observations. I believe the two major camps in
this conversation—those who say the gospel is the good news that
God is reconciling sinners to himself through the substitutionary
death of Jesus (call them “A”) and those who say the gospel is the
good news that God is going to renew and remake the whole world
through Christ (“B”)—are largely talking past one another.
       In other words, I don’t think the As and the Bs are answering
the same question. Of course both camps say they’re answering the
question “What is the gospel?” and thus the tension between the two
different answers. But if we pay close attention, I think we’ll see that
they are actually answering two very different and equally biblical
questions.

56 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
What Is the Gospel?


      Those two questions are these:
      1. What is the gospel? In other words, what is the message
           a person must believe to be saved?
      2. What is the gospel? In other words, what is the whole
           good news of Christianity?
      When an A-person hears the question “What is the gospel?” he
understands it to mean “What is the message a person must believe
to be saved?” and he answers it by talking about the death of Christ
in the place of sinners and the call to repent and believe.
      When a B-person hears the question “What is the gospel?” he
understands it to mean “What is the whole good news of Christian-
ity?” and he answers by talking about God’s purpose to renew the
world through Christ.
      You can understand why there would be tension between the
two. If you answer question (1) by talking about the new creation,
people are understandably going to say that your answer is too
broad and that you are pushing the cross out of its central place.
When people in Scripture asked the question “What must I do to
be saved?” the answer they received was to repent of sin and believe
in Jesus—not something about the coming new creation.
      Yet it’s also true that the Bible sometimes (even often) talks
about “the gospel” in terms of the new creation. So to answer ques-
tion (2) by only talking about Christ’s death in the place of sinners
and to say that everything else is by definition not-gospel (but
merely implication) is indeed too narrow. That would be to say that
promises such as the resurrection of the body, the reconciliation of
Jew and Gentile, the new heavens and new earth, and many others
are somehow not part of what the Bible holds out as the “good news”
of Christianity.

57 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


       What we need to understand is that neither of these two ques-
tions is wrong and neither is more biblical than the other. The Bible
asks and answers both of them. Let me show now from Scripture why
I think both these questions I mentioned are legitimate and biblical.
       As I read it, the Bible seems to use the word “gospel” in two
different but highly related ways. Sometimes it uses “gospel” in a very
broad way, that is, to describe all the promises that God intends to
fulfill in Christ, including not only forgiveness of sin, but also ev-
erything else that flows from it—the establishment of the kingdom,
the new heavens and new earth, etc. There are other times, though,
where it uses “gospel” in a very narrow way, that is, to describe specifi-
cally the forgiveness of sins through the substitutionary death and
resurrection of Christ. In those places, the broader promises don’t
seem to be so much in view.
       Here are some of the clearest places, I think, where the Bible
uses the word “gospel” in the narrow sense:
       1. Acts 10:36–43: “As for the word that he sent to Israel,
preaching good news of peace through Jesus Christ (he is Lord of
all), . . . To him all the prophets bear witness that everyone who
believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
       Peter says that the gospel he preaches is that of “peace through
Jesus Christ,” by which he means specifically the good news “that
everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through
his name.”
       2. Romans 1:16–17: “For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for
it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the
Jew first and also to the Greek. For in it the righteousness of God is
revealed from faith for faith, as it is written, ‘The righteous shall live
by faith.’”

58 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
What Is the Gospel?


     Paul defines the gospel in terms of “salvation” and the righteous-
ness of God being revealed through faith. It becomes clear through
the rest of the book that he’s talking here about forgiveness of sins
(justification) being through faith, not works. His focus in Romans
is not on the coming kingdom, but on how one becomes a part of it.
And that he calls “gospel.”
     3. 1 Corinthians 1:17–18: “For Christ did not send me to
baptize but to preach the gospel, and not with words of eloquent
wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power. For the
word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to us who
are being saved it is the power of God.” The gospel Paul is sent to
preach is “the word of the cross.”
     4. 1 Corinthians 15:1–5: “Now I would remind you, brothers,
of the gospel I preached to you, which you received, in which you
stand, and by which you are being saved, if you hold fast to the word
I preached to you—unless you believed in vain. For I delivered to
you as of first importance what I also received: that Christ died for
our sins in accordance with the Scriptures, that he was buried, that
he was raised on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures, and
that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.”
     The gospel Paul preached to them and which they received was
that “Christ died for our sins . . . was buried . . . [and] was raised.”
The continuing references to the appearances shouldn’t be taken as
part of “the gospel,” as if we have to tell someone that Jesus appeared
to Peter, the Twelve, and James or we’re not telling them the gospel.
Those references are meant to establish the resurrection as real and
historical.
     And here are some of the clearest places, I think, where it is
used in the broad sense:

59 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


      1. Matthew 4:23: “And he went throughout all Galilee, teach-
ing in their synagogues and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom
and healing every disease and every affliction among the people.”
      This is the first mention of the word “gospel” in Matthew’s ac-
count, so we should expect some contours to be given to the term.
To fill in the content of the “gospel of the kingdom” which Jesus
preached, we look back to verse 17, the first mention of “kingdom.”
There, Jesus is recorded as preaching, “Repent, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand!”
      The gospel of the kingdom that Jesus preached was the mes-
sage that a) the kingdom had dawned, and b) those who repent
could enter it.
      2. Mark 1:14-15: “Now after John was arrested, Jesus came
into Galilee, proclaiming the gospel of God, and saying, ‘The time
is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe
in the gospel.’”
      With the exception of the very first verse, this is the first use of
the word in Mark’s account. The “gospel of God” which Jesus pro-
claimed was: “The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at
hand; repent and believe in the gospel.”
      The gospel of God is the message that a) the kingdom has
dawned, and b) those who repent and believe can enter it.
      3. Luke 4:18: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he
has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent
me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight to the
blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed. . .”
      This is the OT passage from which Jesus launches his public
ministry. The word “good news,” as it’s used in Isaiah 61, is I think
referring to the full-orbed establishment of God’s kingdom-rule.

60 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
What Is the Gospel?


      4. Acts 13:32: “And we bring you the good news that what God
promised to the fathers, this he has fulfilled to us their children by
raising Jesus. . .”
      Verse 38 is very clear that the good news Paul brought was that
forgiveness of sin comes through “this man.” But also, in verse 32 the
“good news” is said to be “that what God promised to the fathers,
this he has fulfilled . . . by raising Jesus.” Surely God’s promises to
the fathers, now fulfilled in Jesus, included but were not limited to
forgiveness of sins?
      So looking carefully into the New Testament, it seems to me
that the word “gospel” is used in both a broad way and in a narrower
way. Broadly, as in Matthew 4, Mark 1, Luke 4, and Acts 13, it refers
to all the promises made to us through the work of Jesus—not only
forgiveness of sins, but also resurrection, reconciliation with both
God and others, sanctification, glorification, coming Kingdom, new
heavens and new earth, and so forth.
      You might say that in those cases, “gospel” refers to the whole
complex of God’s promises secured through the life and work of
Christ. We might call this broader sense the gospel of the kingdom.
In the narrow sense, such as we see in Acts 10, the whole book of
Romans, 1 Corinthians 1 and 1 Corinthians 15, “gospel” refers spe-
cifically to the atoning death and resurrection of Jesus and the call to
all people to repent and believe in him. We might call this narrower
sense the gospel of the cross.
      Now let me make two other things explicit.
      First, the broad use of the word “gospel” necessarily includes
the narrow. Look at those examples from Matthew and Mark. Jesus
does not just proclaim the onset of the kingdom, as many have said.
He proclaims the onset of the kingdom and he proclaims the means
of entering it. Look closely: Jesus did not preach the gospel saying,

61 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


“The kingdom of heaven has come!” He preached the gospel saying,
“The kingdom of heaven has come. Therefore repent and believe!”
      This is crucial, the difference indeed between gospel and
not-gospel:
      To proclaim the inauguration of the kingdom and the new
creation and all the rest without proclaiming how people can
enter it—by repenting and being forgiven of their sins through
faith in Christ and his atoning death—is to preach a non-gospel.
      Indeed, it is to preach bad news, since you give people no hope
of being included in that new creation. The gospel of the kingdom is
not merely the proclamation of the kingdom. It is the proclamation
of the kingdom together with the proclamation that people may enter
it by repentance and faith in Christ.
      Second, it’s worth noting explicitly, again, the fact that the
New Testament calls the specific, narrow message of forgiveness
of sins through Christ “the gospel.” Therefore, those who would
argue something like, “If you’re just preaching the forgiveness of
sins through Christ, and not God’s intention to remake the world,
you’re not preaching the gospel,” are wrong. Both Paul and Peter
(just to mention names from the above examples) seem quite
happy to say that they have preached “the gospel” if they have told
people about the forgiveness of sins through the substitutionary
death of Jesus, full stop.
      If it is true that the New Testament uses the word “gospel” in
both a broad and a narrow sense, how are we to understand the
relationship between those two senses, between the gospel of the
kingdom and the gospel of the cross? That’s the next question, and
once we answer it, I think it will help us to be clearer in our own
minds about some really important questions.

62 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
What Is the Gospel?


      So how do the gospel of the kingdom and the gospel of the
cross relate? I already have argued that the gospel of the kingdom
necessarily includes the gospel of the cross.
      But more specifically, is the gospel of the cross merely a part
of the gospel of the kingdom, or something more? Is it central to it,
peripheral to it, the heart of it, or something else? And for that mat-
ter, why are the New Testament writers willing to apply the word
“gospel” to the particular promise of forgiveness of sin through faith
in Christ, and not to other particular promises that are included in
the broad gospel? Why do we never see Paul saying, “And that’s my
gospel: that humans can be reconciled to each other!”?
      I think we can get at an answer to all those questions by real-
izing that the gospel of the cross is not just any part of the gospel of
the kingdom. Rather, the gospel of the cross is the gateway, the foun-
tainhead, even the seed, so to speak, of the gospel of the kingdom.
Read the whole New Testament, and you quickly realize that its
univocal message is that a person cannot get to those broad blessings
of the kingdom except by being forgiven of sin through the death of
Christ. That is the fountain from which all the rest springs.
      That, I think, is why it is perfectly appropriate for the biblical
authors to call that fountainhead “the gospel” even as they also call
the whole package—including forgiveness, justification, resurrec-
tion, new creation and all the rest—“the gospel.” Because the broad
blessings of the gospel are attained only by means of the narrow
(atonement, forgiveness, faith and repentance), and because those
blessings are attained infallibly by means of the narrow, it’s entirely
appropriate for the New Testament writers to call that gateway/
seed/fountainhead promise “the gospel.”
      It’s also perfectly appropriate for the New Testament to call
that fountainhead “the gospel” and at the same time not call any

63 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


other particular blessing of the broader package “the gospel.” So we
don’t call human reconciliation “the gospel.” Nor do we even call the
new heavens and new earth “the gospel.” But we do call forgiveness
through atonement “the gospel” because it is the fountainhead of and
gateway to all the rest.
     Thereare some important implications that flow from this.
     First, it is worth saying again: Those who argue that “the gospel”
is the declaration of the kingdom are simply wrong. The gospel is
not the declaration of the kingdom; it is (in the broad sense) the
declaration of the kingdom together with the means of entering it.
     Second, to say that the gospel of the cross is somehow not the
gospel, or less than the gospel, is wrong. So long as the question is,
“What is the message a person must believe to be saved,” the gospel
of the cross is the gospel. Jesus, Paul, and Peter say so.1
     Third, to say that the gospel of the kingdom is somehow gos-
pel-plus, or a distraction from the real gospel, is also wrong. So long
as the question is “What is the whole good news of Christianity,” the
gospel of the kingdom is not gospel-plus; it is the gospel. Jesus, Paul,
and Peter say so.
     Fourth, it is wrong to call a person a Christian simply because
they are doing good things and “following Jesus’s example.” To be a
Christian, to be a partaker of the blessings of the Kingdom, requires
one first to go through the gate—that is, to come to Christ in faith
and be forgiven of sin and atoned for.
     Bunyan tells the story in Pilgrim’s Progress about the characters
Mr. Formalist and Mr. Hypocrisy whom Christian meets on the

1   Jesus very clearly preaches the gospel of the cross (in Mark 10:45, for instance) even if
    he doesn’t explicitly tie the word “gospel” to it in his recorded words. On a more general
    note, even as we recognize the benefit of word-studies, we should not tie our definition
    of the gospel and our identification of it in the text too tightly to occurrences of the word
    “gospel.” Otherwise, we’d have to say that John never talks about it, for he never uses the
    word in all his New Testament writings.


64 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
What Is the Gospel?


path to the Celestial City. After a moment’s conversation, however,
Christian realizes that they had jumped the wall to the path rather
than going through the Wicket Gate. The upshot: These two are not
Christians, regardless of how well they are now navigating the path.
      To change the characters a bit, there are many people out there
who must realize that Mr. Jesus-Follower and Mrs. Kingdom-Life-
Liver are not Christians—not unless they have come to the crucified
Jesus in repentance and faith for the forgiveness of their sins. A
person can “live like Jesus lived” all he wants to, but unless he goes
through the Wicket Gate of atonement, faith and repentance, he’s
not really come to Christ. He’s simply jumped the wall.
      Fifth, I believe it is wrong ever to say that non-Christians are
doing “kingdom work.” A non-Christian working for human recon-
ciliation or justice is doing a good thing, but that is not kingdom
work because it is not done in the name of the King. C.S. Lewis was
wrong; you cannot do good things in the name of Tash and expect
Aslan to be happy about it.
      Sixth, the ultimate goal of any mercy ministry—whether done
by an individual Christian or a church—has to be to point the world
back to the gate. Much could be said here, but I think understand-
ing all this rightly can provide a powerful missionary motive and a
penetrating witness to the world.
      When you renovate a barber shop in the name of Jesus, for
instance, you need to tell the owner (to put it sharply for brevity’s
sake), “Look, I’m doing this because I serve a God who cares about
things like beauty and order and peace. In fact, the Bible says and I
believe that God is one day going to recreate this world and inaugu-
rate a kingdom where paint won’t peel and trees won’t die. But [and
here we get to the point] I don’t think you’re going to be a part of that.
Because of your sin. Unless you repent and believe in Christ.” And

65 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


then you tell him the good news of the cross. If you just renovate the
barber shop and proclaim the coming kingdom, you’ve fallen short
of proclaiming the gospel. The gospel of the kingdom is the declara-
tion of the kingdom together with the means of getting into it.
      Seventh, as I’ve argued before, I believe that many in the
so-called emergent church—for all their insistence about how as-
tonishing and surprising their gospel is—have missed entirely what
really is astonishing about the gospel.
      That Jesus is King and has inaugurated a kingdom of love and
compassion is not really all that astonishing at all. Every Jew knew
that was going to happen someday. What is truly astonishing about
the gospel is that the Messianic King dies to save his people—that
the divine Son of Man in Daniel, the Davidic Messiah, and the Suf-
fering Servant in Isaiah turn out to be the same man. That, moreover,
is ultimately how we tie together the gospel of the kingdom and the
gospel of the cross. Jesus is not just King, but Crucified King. Next
to that, what many in the emergent church are holding out as an
astonishing gospel is not astonishing at all. It’s just boring.
      Eighth, everything we’ve said so far drives toward the conclu-
sion that evangelistic, missiological, and pastoral emphasis in this
age belongs on the gospel of the cross—on the fountainhead, the
gateway of the broader gospel of the kingdom. That is because all
the rest is unattainable and indeed bad news unless we point people
there. Not only so, but this is the age in which God’s overarching
command to every human in the world is “Repent and believe.”
      There’s only one command that is actually included in the gos-
pel itself (whether broad or narrow): Repent and believe. That is
the primary obligation on human beings in this age, and therefore it
must be our primary emphasis in our preaching, too.




66 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
  Gospel-Centrality: A Warning
    and a Recommendation
                     BOBBY JAMIESON




How do you move beyond the gospel without moving on from the
gospel? On the other hand, if the gospel is so all-important, do we
need to “move beyond” the gospel in any sense at all?
     Those are two of the questions which are raised by this increas-
ingly audible gospel-centrality movement among evangelicals.
     A while back, I looked at one possible objection to this move-
ment. In this post I’ll tackle these two questions. One yields a
recommendation, the other a warning.
     First, I should say that I think evangelicals’ apparently increas-
ing focus on the gospel is a wonderful trend. These many voices are
right to tell us that the gospel is central to sanctification, that the
indicative grounds the imperative, and that we don’t move beyond
the gospel but deeper into the gospel. These are all deeply biblical
arguments.

TWO EVANGELICAL “ISMS”:
ESSENTIALISM AND REDUCTIONISM
But, someone might say, “If the gospel is so all-important, do we
need to ‘move beyond’ it in any sense at all?”
     Evangelicals are deeply essentialist. For a variety of historically
conditioned reasons, we like to boil things down to their road-ready
minimum and get on with life. As I’ve often heard it said, we tend to
have two speeds, essential and unimportant.

67 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


      One danger with this new movement, then, is that if the gospel
occupies the “essential” category (and it should!), then everything
else will be consigned to the “unimportant” bin.
      Once in a while I’ll hear little hints of this in warnings not to let
anything eclipse or overshadow or marginalize the gospel in our lives
and churches. Such warnings are necessary and on the mark, but if
we don’t carve out a third space between essential and unimport-
ant, the gospel itself will be in danger. You can’t preserve the gospel
merely by focusing on the gospel. There are all kinds of God-given
doctrines and practices which are necessary to that end, and we ne-
glect them to our own peril.
      For example, the doctrine of the Trinity is inseparable from the
gospel. Father, Son, and Spirit each fulfill distinct roles in salvation,
which means that any distortion of the Trinity is a distortion of the
gospel as well.
      Another example: the truthfulness of Scripture presents a firm
epistemological foundation for the gospel. Our trust in Christ is
grounded in the truthfulness and trustworthiness of God’s Word.
      As to gospel-protecting practices, consider church member-
ship and church discipline. As Jonathan Leeman has said, church
membership1 shows the world who represents Jesus and church
discipline2 protects the name of Jesus.
      Church membership marks off the body of people who belong
to the gospel. It shows the world, “This is who the gospel people are.
This is the new people which the gospel creates.”

1   Jonathan Leeman, Church Membership: How the World Knows Who Represents Jesus
    (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2012), https://www.9marks.org/books/church-membership/.
2    Jonathan Leeman, Church Discipline: How the Church Protects the Name of
    Jesus (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2012), https://www.9marks.org/books/
    church-discipline-how-the-church-protects-the-name-of-jesus/.


68 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Gospel-Centrality: A Warning and a Recommendation


      And church discipline guards the image of the gospel which the
church displays to the world. It keeps the church from presenting a
false picture of the gospel to the watching nations. It does this by
saying what a Christian isn’t: “This is not the life which flows from
the gospel.”
      Further, as someone has said, church discipline is the gospel in
action.3 In Christ, God doesn’t leave us in our sin. Nor should we leave
our fellow church members in their sin. Instead, we should move to-
ward them with loving rebuke and Christ’s free offer of forgiveness.
      These doctrines and practices, along with many more, are
closely related to the gospel. They’re organically connected to it. We
can’t neglect them without doing some kind of harm to our under-
standing of, and witness to, the gospel.
      So now my warning: don’t let your gospel-centrality become
gospel essentialism, which leads to gospel reductionism. Yes, make
the gospel the center of your life, and your church’s life. But don’t
make it sound as if the gospel is the only thing that matters.

CONNECT THE DOTS
On to the first question: how then do we move beyond the gospel
without moving on from the gospel? In other words, how do we
preach and practice these things without leaving the gospel behind?
     Here’s my recommendation: we do this by constantly connect-
ing the dots between the gospel and our doctrine and practice.
     We’ve done that already in this article. The Trinity, biblical
authority, church membership, and church discipline are organi-
cally connected to the gospel. And so are dozens of other crucial
doctrines and practices.

3 Bobby Jamieson, "Church Discipline Is Not a Dirty Chore," 9Marks, August 21, 2014,
   https://www.9marks.org/article/church-discipline-is-not-a-dirty-chore/.


69 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
2. GOSPEL DOCTRINE


     The way for a church leader to move beyond the gospel without
moving on from the gospel is to make those organic links explicit
in your preaching and teaching. The way to focus on other matters
without losing our focus on the gospel is by tracing out their rela-
tionship to the gospel.
     So teach about church elders and parenting and eschatology
and dating and baptism in light of the gospel, and in a way that
shows how each of these things link to the gospel. That way, other
doctrines and practices won’t compete with the gospel. Instead,
they’ll link arms with it.
     Don’t let your gospel-centrality become gospel reductionism.
Instead, connect the dots between the gospel and everything else,
including the structure and corporate life of the local church.




70 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. Conversion and
   Evangelism
WHAT IS IT?
Conversion is the radical change of heart and life which God brings
about in his people by his Spirit. Evangelism is one person telling
others about how to be reconciled to God through faith in Christ.
Evangelism is often the means by which God converts people.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• From the Law, the prophets, and Jesus and the Apostles’ teaching
  we learn that man is in desperate need of a new heart (Deut. 31:14–
  23, Ezek. 3:7; Mark 7:20–23; Rom. 3:23; Eph. 2:10).
• In the Old Testament, God promised to change his people’s
  hearts himself by sending a Messiah who would redeem them
  from their failures and sins (Isa. 53:4–5; Jer. 31:33–34).
• Through the work of Jesus, the promised Messiah, and God’s
  Holy Spirit, everyone who God calls to himself is convert-
  ed—that is, they repent, believe, and are saved ( John 3:5–13,
  6:37–40). This conversion cannot be accomplished in man’s
  heart without God performing the work ( John 6:44).
• God commands that everyone who has been converted to go and
  share the good news of Jesus with the world in order that they too
  may be saved (Matt. 28:19–20; Rom. 10:14–15; 2 Cor. 5:19).
  This is the work of evangelism, and evangelism is God’s ordinary
  means to bring about conversion.

WHY DOES IT MATTER?
Conversion is important because we were created to find ultimate
joy in dwelling with God, and we must be converted to know and be
with him. Evangelism is important because God calls and uses us to
share the good news with others so that they might be saved.

71 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
               How Should We
              Define Evangelism?1
                            J. MACK STILES




I don’t think Christian people set out to write books on evangelism
based on unbiblical principles. But it happens. It happens because
there are wrong ideas about the critical components of evangelism.
Usually, these wrong ideas are based on marketing principles or on
human understandings about how to argue someone into the king-
dom. It has more to do with results and effect, which is the realm of
the Holy Spirit, rather than faithfulness in proclaiming the truth,
which is our job description. If we don’t have biblical evangelism
nailed down, we tend to spend much time doing things we call evan-
gelism but may not be evangelism at all.
     For example, a housewife meeting with a friend over coffee
may be evangelizing, while a brilliant Christian apologist speaking
to thousands in a church sanctuary may not be. Few see it this way,
but that’s because we have false understandings of what evangelism
is. Defending the faith is a fine thing to do, but it is easy to give
apologetics for Christianity without explaining the gospel—and we
cannot evangelize without the gospel.

1 Editor’s Note: This article is a lightly adapted excerpt from Mack’s book from the
   9Marks Building Healthy Churches series: Evangelism: How the Whole Church
   Speaks of Jesus (Crossway, 2013). It’s the first of three excerpts. The second is
   “Definitions: Gospel and Persuade.” The third is “The Problem with Evangelistic
   Programs.”


72 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
How Should We Define Evangelism?


       We need to know what we’re talking about when we say “evan-
gelism,” “conversion,” or even “gospel.” Those words raise different
definitions in people’s minds and often come with question marks.
If Christians don’t understand these basic concepts, we will quickly
spin out of biblical orbit. So, we define evangelism in a biblical way
to help align our evangelistic practice with the Scriptures. Here’s a
definition that has served me well for many years:
       Evangelism is teaching the gospel with the aim to persuade.
       Sort of dinky, huh? I bet most people would expect much more
from such an important theological word. But this definition, small as
it is, offers a far better balance in which to weigh our evangelistic prac-
tice than looking at how many people have responded to an appeal.
       Here is how the Amplified Bible might have expanded my
definition:
       Evangelism is teaching (heralding, proclaiming, preaching) the gos-
pel (the message from God that leads us to salvation) with the aim (hope,
desire, goal) to persuade (convince, convert).
       Notice the definition doesn’t require an immediate outward
response. Walking an aisle, raising a hand, or even praying a prayer
may tell us that evangelism has happened, but such actions are not
what evangelism is. Notice, too, that if any of the four components
(Teaching, Gospel, Aim, or Persuade) are missing, we are probably
doing something other than evangelism. Let’s look at two of these:
teaching and aim.

TEACHING
Many of us think of preaching when we think of evangelism, as
we should. I, for one, want any sermon I give to contain the gospel.
Certainly Paul did his share of evangelistic preaching. But often
when Paul describes his ministry, he says it is a teaching minis-
try (1 Tim. 2:7; 2 Tim. 1:11). J. I. Packer, in his survey of Paul’s

73 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


evangelistic practice, says that Paul’s method of evangelism was pri-
marily a teaching method.
     This is good news for those of us who don’t get to preach every
Sunday. Not all of us can be preachers, but we can all teach the gospel
as opportunity comes. I often wonder whether more people come to
faith over lunch when someone asks, “What did you think about the
sermon today?” than during the sermon itself. Great things happen
when we can teach the gospel.

AIM
An “aim to persuade” also reminds us that people need more than a
data transfer. Some who think of evangelism as only teaching do a
good job of explaining, expanding, and answering questions, as we
all should. All Christians should apply themselves to think through
reasons for the hope we have in Christ, reasons that sweep aside the
objections and questions. But as we set out the facts of the gospel,
remembering evangelism’s aim helps us to be compassionate, under-
standing, and loving (1 Pet. 3:15).
      Having an aim helps us keep perspective on what we’re doing.
It steers us toward an end. Our aim helps us remember that much is
at stake: to see people moved from darkness to light, from bondage
to freedom. Aiming for something bigger helps us know which fights
to pick and which to avoid.




74 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
      One of the Dirtiest Words
          Today: C--------n
                       BRAD WHEELER




I was recently called in for my semi-annual performance review
where I work as a financial advisor. My regional manager was du-
tifully engaging me in pleasantries about life and family when I
casually mentioned that I would be preaching at my local church the
following Sunday.
      As if on cue, my manager smiled, leaned back into the folds of
his leather chair, and launched into a monologue about how preach-
ers can be wonderful financial advisors because they have a “way
with words and with people.” Preachers are “the best story-tellers,”
and so on.
      With sadness I noted his conception of preachers as “story-
tellers,” but I politely nodded and genuinely appreciated his desire
to connect with me. He then lamented the poor “preachers” he has
heard in his Reform Jewish context. Yet, he proceeded to say, he felt
confident that I did a better job in “motivating others to be better
people,” since “that’s really what it’s all about.”
      Not wanting to lose an opportunity for the gospel (and perhaps
dispel the notion of preachers as mere story-tellers), I tried, albeit
poorly, to draw an analogy between what I aim to do in preaching
and what I aim to do in financial advising. In advising, I review a
person’s financial status, assess the dangers and potential pitfalls of
his current position, and then attempt to direct him down a path of
financial security. “The task of preaching can be similar,” I noted. “I

75 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


help them know something about God and their precarious position
apart from him, and I then point them toward the good news of the
gospel in Jesus Christ.”
     My analogy didn’t have the intended effect, or perhaps it did,
for he quickly retorted, “You’re not actually trying to convert people,
are you?”
     I could tell from his response that I had just crossed the line
and confirmed his greatest fear: I was one of those Christians. You
know, the kind who doesn’t respect other people’s personal beliefs,
who insensitively interfere in other people’s business, and who ar-
rogantly presume that you must think like them—or else.
     He did not say as much, but it was written all over his face.
With a smile I said, “Sure I am. Does that surprise you?”
     He didn’t know quite how to respond, and so in the ensuing
minutes I tried to help him understand that the gospel is not merely
about making people behave better outwardly but being born again
from within ( John 3). A Christian is one who repents of their sin
and believes in Christ (cf. Mark 1:15). Sadly, what my Jewish friend
found so obnoxious was not Christ’s claim upon his life that he
repent and believe, but that I actually preached this message of con-
version to others.

CONVERSION—A DIRTY WORD?
What’s the point of the story? Conversion is a dirty word. It’s scan-
dalous in today’s pluralistic and relativistic world to contend for one
religious truth over and against another. It smacks of pride, arro-
gance, disrespect, perhaps hatred, maybe even violence.
      This is the consensus among many of the secular elite. Popular
television personality Bill Maher believes Christianity can only be

76 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
One of the Dirtiest Words Today: C--------n


explained as a “neurological disorder.”1 Only the most unenlightened,
uneducated, and uncouth Neanderthal would both believe and con-
tend for a conversion to religious faith, especially Christianity. It’s
absolutely what the modern man does not need.
        And Maher simply represents what secular humanism as a move-
ment has been saying all along. To quote from their own manifesto,
“traditional theism . . . and salvationism . . . based on mere affirmation
is harmful, diverting people with false hopes of heaven hereafter. Rea-
sonable minds look to other means for survival.”2 Reasonable minds
. . . you can hear the condescension dripping from the pen.
        Some go further, of course. They say such attempts at diversion
(i.e. conversion) actually breed violence. In a publicized letter to the
Pope John Paul II, Hindu scholar Swami Dayananda Saraswati ar-
gued that “religious conversion destroys centuries-old communities
and incites communal violence. It is violence and it breeds violence.”
        There is a sense in which I agree with Saraswati. Forced
conversion at the edge of a sword—be it in modern day Islam or
ninth-century “Christianity” under Charlemagne—will incite
violence. But of course for Saraswati and the liberal academic estab-
lishment, it is no less violent, demeaning, and contemptible to simply
say the words out loud, “Hell does exist, and people will consciously
suffer for eternity on account of their sins.” Such is the confused
world we live in.

1   The broader context is as follows. “We are a nation that is unenlightened because of reli-
    gion. I do believe that. I think that religion stops people from thinking. I think it justifies
    crazies. I think flying planes into buildings was a faith-based initiative. I think religion is a
    neurological disorder.” In the interview Maher goes on to say, “I don’t hate America. I love
    America. I am just embarrassed that it has been taken over by people like evangelicals, by
    people who do not believe in science and rationality. It is the 21st century. And I will tell
    you, my friend. The future does not belong to evangelicals.”
2   See http://www.americanhumanist.org/about/manifesto2.html.


77 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


     Of course, a Christian should not be too surprised when the
world scorns and derides his or her message (though neither should
we erect needless opposition to the gospel and then glory in our per-
secution as a Christian badge of honor). We are promised that the
message of the cross is nothing other than foolishness to those who
are perishing (cf. 1 Cor. 1:18). And yet there is a sense of embarrass-
ment in some ostensibly Christian circles for “conversionist” theology.
Ashamed of their heritage, these self-professed Christians attempt
to blaze a new (i.e. better) and more respectable path forward.
     Just in recent months the Vatican and World Council of
Churches—which includes more than 350 mainline Protestant,
Orthodox, and related churches—began working on a “common
code for religious conversions.” Input is also being solicited from
Muslim leaders.
     The fact that the various constituencies within this group
hold to differing gospels ought to make us immediately suspect.
Nonetheless, their hope is to “distinguish between witness and
proselytism, making respect for freedom of thought, conscience
and the religion of others a primary concern in any encounter be-
tween people of different faiths.”
     The specific findings and recommendations of this commis-
sion will not be complete for another few years, but a few things are
patently clear. For starters, “respect” is cherished and prized above
everything, including truth. And the way to show respect to others is
to not proselytize them (seek their conversion), but to bear witness
to one’s own truth while appreciating their truth.
     In short, what used to be understood as the radical need for
regeneration and conversion has been eviscerated. We might say that
this common code for religious conversion is really just a common
code for non-conversion.

78 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
One of the Dirtiest Words Today: C--------n


     Yet it seems that conversion is even under attack among some
professed evangelicals. This ought to strike us as nonsensical. Our
English word “evangelical” comes from the Greek word for “good
news.” What is this good news? It is that we, who are at enmity with
God in our sin, can now be reconciled to him on account of Christ’s
death and resurrection, when we repent of our sin and believe upon
Christ. Conversion from our former way of life and thinking to
Christianity is required. This much should be blatantly obvious.
     Nonetheless, Brian MacLaren, perhaps the most prominent
leader within the emerging church movement, calls for a reconsid-
eration of conversion, if not an outright rejection of it. He writes in
A Generous Orthodoxy,

       I must add, though, that I don’t believe making disciples must equal making
       adherents to the Christian religion. It may be advisable in many (though
       not all) circumstances to help people become followers of Jesus and remain
       within their Buddhist, Hindu, or Jewish contexts. This will be hard, you say,
       and I agree. But frankly, it’s not at all easy to be a follower of Jesus in many
       ‘Christian’ religious contexts, either.3


      We are told to embrace other faiths “willingly, not begrudging-
ly.” To be fair, McLaren asserts the uniqueness of Christianity apart
from other religions.4 And yet his belief in “a gospel that is univer-
sally efficacious for the whole earth,” his unwillingness to “set limits
on the saving power of God” in reference to the unevangelized, and
his belief that we must continually expect to “rediscover the gospel”

3    Brian MacLaren, A Generous Orthodoxy: Why I Am a Missional, Evan-
    gelical, Post/Protestant, Liberal/Conservative, Mystical/Poetic, Biblical,
    Charismatic/Contemplative, Fundamentalist/Calvinist, Anabaptist/Anglican,
    Methodist, Catholic, Green, Incarnational, Depressed-yet-Hopeful, Emergent, Un-
    finished CHRISTIAN (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2004 Paperback), 293.
4   Ibid, 283 and 295.


79 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


as we encounter other religious traditions, “leading to that new place
where none of us has ever been before,” raises significant and serious
questions.5 Frankly, I have difficulty seeing how he is recommending
anything Christian, let alone orthodox. In the end, his proposals are
eerily similar to those being set forth by the Vatican and the WCC.

CONVERSION—A BIBLICAL IDEA?
Given how narrow-minded and bigoted conversion appears to the
modern mind, must we contend for it as Christians? In other words,
is a doctrine of conversion biblically required?
      Absolutely. Although, the word is rare in the New Testament
(cf. Matt. 23:15; Acts 6:5; 15:3; 1 Tim. 3:6), the idea of conversion
is central to the storyline of Scripture.
      The common words in Hebrew (shub) and Greek (epistrephô)
that picture conversion are regularly translated “turn,” “turn back,”
“return,” or “restore” in our English text. We read in Ezekiel 33:11,
‘Say to them, ‘As surely as I live, declares the Sovereign Lord, I take
no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that they turn
from their ways and live. Turn! Turn from your evil ways! Why will
you die, O house of Israel?’’
      Similarly in Isaiah 55:7: “Let the wicked forsake his way and
the evil man his thoughts. Let him turn to the Lord, and he will have
mercy on him, and to our God, for he will freely pardon.”
      In the New Testament, Paul says that Christ sent him to the
Gentiles in order to “open their eyes and turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may receive

5   Ibid, 124, 294, 293. Additionally, when asked about the exclusivity of the gospel (which
    would necessitate a conversion to Christ in contrast to an “inclusive” or “universal” gospel
    that offers hope to all, including the unconverted in this life), McLaren simply says such
    questions are “weapons of mass distraction.” He dismisses the question and refuses to
    answer. Sadly, this non-answer is an answer. See A Generous Orthodoxy, 42.


80 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
One of the Dirtiest Words Today: C--------n


forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by
faith in me” (Acts 26:18). He also recounts how the church in Thes-
salonica “turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God”
(1 Thes. 1:9).
     Luke says of John the Baptist, “Many of the people of Israel will
he bring back to the Lord their God” (Luke 1:16).
     This picture of conversion as “turning” or “returning” is also
seen in Christ’s regular call to “follow me,” as when he says, “If any-
one would come after me, he must deny himself and take up his
cross and follow me” (cf. Matt. 16:24; Mark 8:34; Luke 9:23). Or,
“anyone who does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy
of me” (Matt. 10:38). Following Christ is costly. Taking up one’s
cross means forsaking everything. To the individual enslaved to his
wealth, for instance, Jesus says, “Go, sell everything you have and give
to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, fol-
low me” (Mark 10:21). To the disciple who wants to bury his father,
Jesus commands, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead”
(Matt. 8:22).

CONVERSION—WHAT IT IS AND ISN’T
  So what exactly is conversion? Can we sum it up?

Repentance and Faith
First, this picture of conversion as turning from self and humbly
following after God can be captured in two words—repentance and
faith. Conversion equals repentance and faith. In conversion, we turn
our minds, emotions, and wills from the service of an idol (namely,
self ) to another (God). By faith we then trust in God and his Word,
believing like Abraham and all of God’s saints that he who promised
is faithful. In this sense, conversion and repentance are inextricably
linked. As one writer helpfully puts it,

81 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


     Repentance, the forsaking of sin and the cultivating of a new
hope, and faith, turning to Christ in belief and trust, are related
to one another as two sides of a coin. The two are interdependent
responses, each incomplete without the other. Thus conversion in-
volves both a believing repentance and a penitent faith.6

Radical and Costly
Second, the call to conversion is both radical and costly. It is costly
because it necessitates the denial of self. To follow Christ is to sub-
jugate all earthly pleasures and desires before his will. We ourselves,
even our family, all take backstage before this unyielding commit-
ment to our king.
     It is radical because it exchanges darkness for light, dead idols
for the living God, the passing wealth of this life for the enduring
riches of heaven. The radical nature of conversion is also witnessed
in some of the more extraordinary conversion accounts recorded in
the book of Acts (cf. Paul in ch. 9; Cornelius in ch. 10; Philippian
jailer in ch.16). Even if the process is slow and we can’t point to a
moment in time when the Lord brought us out of the realm of dark-
ness and into the realm of light, this doesn’t mean the change is any
less dramatic and distinct. One is no longer a child of the devil but
has been adopted as a child of God (cf. 1 John 3:10).

Not Mere Dialogue
Third, conversion is not mere dialogue or conversation. Sadly, this is
commonly misunderstood. Dialogue is often presented almost as an
end itself. I share my Christian experiences, you share your Buddhist

6   Bruce Demarest, The Cross and Salvation (Wheaton: Crossway Books, 1997), 263-4.


82 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
One of the Dirtiest Words Today: C--------n


experiences, and we’re both the better for it, since “we’re all recipients
of the same mercy, sharing in the same mystery.”7
     But dialogue is not the end, conversion is. Of course, no conver-
sion can take place without respectful dialogue, and no conversion
is possible unless God initiates supernatural change in the heart.
Nonetheless, we do not walk away from a dialogue happy if our
friend still rejects Christ. Rather, like the prophets of the Old Testa-
ment, Christ, and Paul, we weep and mourn for those who remain in
their sin and refuse to follow after God (cf. Matt. 23:37).

Not Just a Journey
Fourth, conversion is not a journey. In a journey one may wander,
but never arrive. He may learn, but never comes to any conclusion.
Many today say that the journey (merely learning) is itself sufficient.
     But journeying is not enough. We must enter into God’s king-
dom. We must reach the final destination, for there will come a time
when the bridegroom will come and those that are not with him will
be shut out of the wedding feast (Matt. 25:10).

Not Optional
Fifth, the call to conversion is neither optional nor negotiable. The
biblical writers do not merely encourage but command in the most
unequivocal terms that all must turn and follow after God in Christ.
Notice how many of the commands above are accompanied with
a corresponding warning. Failure to repent and turn to God is no
minor matter. It forfeits life for death, judgment, and hell.
      And yet the call to conversion is never accompanied with physi-
cal force, manipulation, or coercion. Christians should persuade and
reason with words, no more (2 Cor. 4:1–2). Their only “sword” is

7   Brian McLaren, A Generous Orthodoxy, 291.


83 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


the Word of God and the witness of their lives. Nothing could be
sharper or more effective (cf. Heb. 4:12).
     So just how biblically necessary is conversion? When Paul and
Barnabas were at Lystra and Derbe, the people witnessed their mir-
acles and confused them for the Greek gods of Zeus and Hermes.
Paul and Barnabas’ response is instructive:

      But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of this, they tore their
      clothes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting: “Men, why are you doing
      this? We too are only men, human like you. We are bringing you good news,
      telling you to turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made
      heaven and earth and sea and everything in them” (Acts 14:14–15).


     There would be no syncretism, no amalgamation of the Chris-
tian gospel and Greek mythology (or Buddhism, or Hinduism, or
anything else for that matter). Paul and Barnabas insisted that all
turn from these worthless false gods to the living God. They insisted
on nothing short of a wholehearted, radical conversion.

BENEFITS FOR BELIEVERS
Conversion lies at the very heart of Christianity. To sacrifice it is to
sacrifice nothing other than the gospel and the good news it prom-
ises to all. This is surely reason enough to defend a clear and robust
understanding of biblical conversion. Lord willing, we’ll think more
about the theological doctrine and its implications in our next piece.
      But do we need to say anything more? Here are just two reasons
why a proper understanding of conversion is important not only to
God and the unconverted in our midst, but to our own spiritual
well-being as believers.

84 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
One of the Dirtiest Words Today: C--------n


Humility
First, a proper understanding of conversion promotes humility and
makes grace meaningful. Paul writes, “Once you were alienated from
God and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior.
But now he has reconciled you by Christ’s physical body through
death to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from
accusation” (Col. 1:21–22ff ).
     Or consider Peter, “For Christ died for sins once for all, the
righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God” (1 Pet. 3:18).
     What were we? Before conversion, we were unrighteous, alien-
ated, and enemies of God. And this is not figurative language or
hyperbole. We concern ourselves with terror attacks, invest in costly
alarm systems for our homes, and fret over whether our cars have
side air bags—all in an attempt to feel safe and secure. But imagine
for a moment what it would be like to have the God of the universe
as your enemy. The Bible says we really were at enmity with God,
and more to the point, he with us (cf. Jas. 4:4)!
     How else can we explain the pain, agony, and wrath of the cross,
if not that God was propitiating his own anger towards us, enemies
of his holiness and justice?
     If conversion is not necessary, neither is the cross.
     We must preach the gospel to ourselves again and again, re-
membering in all humility what we deserved, and then rejoicing at
the tremendous grace God has shown in reconciling us through the
cross of Christ.

Missions
Second, a proper understanding of conversion fuels our mission-
ary endeavors. The world is in danger. There is a spiritual battle
for the souls of men. Satan would like nothing more than to see
today’s church lulled into complacency by suggesting that a radical

85 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


conversion to Christianity isn’t finally necessary. “Sure,” the voices
of inclusivism or universalism say, “it might be preferable to call for
conversion, but is it really necessary? A first-class airline seat may be
preferable to a coach ticket, but both finally arrive at the same des-
tination, right? So let people remain where they are.” By definition,
both inclusivism (which says that some “anonymous Christian””
may be saved through Christ, even though they haven’t consciously
repented and believed in him) and universalism (which says that all
humanity will be saved) destroy the biblical witness and our impetus
for world missions.
     We do well to remember these words of Christ instead:

      Once again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was let down into the
      lake and caught all kinds of fish. When it was full, the fishermen pulled it
      up on the shore. Then they sat down and collected the good fish in baskets,
      but threw the bad away. This is how it will be at the end of the age. The an-
      gels will come and separate the wicked from the righteous and throw them
      into the fiery furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth
      (Matt. 13:47–50).


     Only in Christ are all made alive and reconciled to God (cf.
1 Cor. 15:22). Thus, it is absolutely incumbent upon any Christian
to preach this call to conversion, imploring all to be reconciled to
God through Christ (cf. 2 Cor. 5:17–21).

CONCLUSION: ONE OF THOSE CHRISTIANS
“You’re not actually trying to convert people, are you?” That moment
with my boss was uncomfortable. No one wants to share the gospel
only to receive the look of death and horror that cries, “you honestly
believe that . . . about God . . . about me? How could you?!”

86 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
One of the Dirtiest Words Today: C--------n


     I don’t enjoy being divisive any more than the next guy. And
yet the gospel presents two dialectically opposed ways to live. We
are either saved or unsaved, converted or unconverted, a sheep or a
goat, a God-worshipper or an idolater, a son of God or a son of the
devil, on the narrow path or on the broad path, in the realm of light
or darkness, destined for heaven or condemned to hell. We neglect
or reject this doctrine at our own peril.
     Robert Duncan Culver said it well:

       Conversion is as important to the experience and ministry of every minister
       of the Word and genuine Christian witness as birth to a baby or oxygen to a
       fire. Without it we are nothing in the kingdom of God and, Jesus said, des-
       tined to be cast out of it and, like weeds in the wheat field at harvest time, to
       be removed from the field and burned in the fire where ‘there will be weeping
       and gnashing of teeth’ (Matt. 13:36–42).8


      Don’t be apologetic. Be one of those Christians. Conversion may
be a dirty word, but if so it is the one dirty word the Christian must
preach with all boldness and passion.
      Besides, what’s the alternative? Telling people that this world is
enough? That their selfish, vain, addiction-ridden, and futile lives are
just fine the way they are? That being renewed in the image of God
is not all that it’s cracked up to be?
      I can’t imagine anything more discouraging—and damning!




8   Robert Duncan Culver, Systematic Theology, (Christian Focus Publications, 2005), 700.


87 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
          The Corporate
      Component of Conversion
                       JONATHAN LEEMAN




If your doctrine of conversion is missing the corporate element, it’s
missing an essential piece of the whole. A covenant head comes with
a covenant people.

VERTICAL FIRST,
HORIZONTAL INSEPARABLY SECOND
That’s not to say we should put the corporate element out front.
One might think of N. T. Wright’s well-known line about justifi-
cation being “not so much about soteriology as about ecclesiology;
not so much about salvation as about the church” (What Saint
Paul Really Said, 119). This is a clear example, in Douglas Moo’s
almost-as-well-known line, of backgrounding what the New Tes-
tament foregrounds, and foregrounding what the New Testament
backgrounds (cited in D. A. Carson, “‘Faith’ and ‘Faithfulness’”1).
     There can be no true reconciliation between humans until
individual sinners first reconcile with God. The horizontal necessar-
ily follows the vertical. Ecclesiology necessarily follows soteriology.
Which is to say, the corporate element must not come first, lest we
lose the whole thing.

1   D.A. Carson, “Faith and Faithfulness,” Ligonier Ministries, https://learn.ligonier.
    org/articles/faith-and-faithfulness.


88 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Corporate Component of Conversion


      But it must come. Indeed, the corporate component must re-
main within the structure of the doctrine of conversion itself. Our
corporate unity in Christ is not just an implication of conversion,
it’s part of the very thing. Being reconciled to God’s people is distinct
from but inseparable from being reconciled to God.
      Sometimes this gets lost in our emphasis on the mechanics
of conversion, as when our doctrinal discussions about conver-
sion don’t move beyond the relationship of divine sovereignty and
human responsibility or the necessity of repentance and faith.
However, a full-orbed understanding of conversion should also in-
clude an account of what we’re moving from and to. To be converted
involves moving from death to life, from the domain of darkness to
the domain of light. And it involves moving from people-less-ness
to belonging to a people, from being a stray sheep to belonging
to the flock, from being something that’s dismembered to being a
member of the body.
      Notice Peter’s parallel statements: “Once you were not a people,
but now you are God’s people; once you had not received mercy, but
now you have received mercy” (1 Pet. 2:10).
      Receiving mercy (vertical reconciliation) is simultaneous to be-
coming a people (horizontal reconciliation). God has mercy on us by
forgiving our sins, and a necessary consequence of that is inclusion
in his people.

CORPORATE NATURE OF THE COVENANTS
Indeed, the corporate element of our conversion can be seen by
looking no further than the covenantal structure of the Bible. It’s
true that all the Old Testament covenants find their fulfillment
in the seed (singular) of Abraham. Jesus is the new Israel. Yet it’s
also true that everyone united to Christ through the new covenant

89 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


also becomes the Israel of God and the seed (plural) of Abraham
(Gal. 3:29; 6:16).
     In other words, a covenantal head by definition brings with
him a covenantal people (see Rom. 5:12ff.). To belong to the new
covenant, then, is to belong to a people.
     Not surprisingly, the Old Testament promises of a new covenant
are therefore promised to a people: “And no longer shall each one teach
his neighbor and each his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ for they
shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest, declares the
Lord. For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no
more” ( Jer. 31:34). The new covenant promises forgiveness (vertical),
and it promises a community of brothers (horizontal).

VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL IN EPHESIANS 2
The entire story is put on display wonderfully in Ephesians 2. Verses
1 to 10 explain forgiveness and our vertical reconciliation with God:
“By grace you have been saved.” Verses 11 to 20 then present the hori-
zontal: “For he himself is our peace, who has made us both one and
has broken down in his flesh the dividing wall of hostility” (v. 14).
     Notice that the activity of verse 14 is in the past tense. Christ
has already made Jew and Gentile one. There is no imperative here.
Paul is not commanding his readers to pursue unity. Instead, he’s
speaking in the indicative. It’s what they are because God has done it,
and God did it in precisely the same place he accomplished the verti-
cal reconciliation—in the cross of Christ (see also the relationship
between indicative and imperative in Eph. 4:1–6).
     By virtue of Christ’s new covenant, corporate unity belongs to
the indicative of conversion. To be converted is to be made a mem-
ber of Christ’s body. Our new identity contains an ecclesial element.
Christ has made us ecclesial persons.

90 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Corporate Component of Conversion


      Here’s an easy way to see it. When mom and dad go down to
the orphanage to adopt a son, they bring him home and place him at
the family dinner table with a new set of brothers and sisters. To be
a son is not the same thing as being a brother. And sonship comes
first. But brotherhood follows necessarily.
      That is to say, conversion signs you up for a family photo.

PERSONAL APPLICATION: JOIN A CHURCH
What’s the application for our lives? Simple: join a church!
     You’ve been made righteous, so be righteous. You’ve been made
a member of his body, so join an actual body. You’ve been made one,
so be one with an actual group of Christians.

CORPORATE APPLICATION:
GET THE MECHANICS RIGHT
What does this mean for our churches? It means that getting the
aforementioned mechanics of conversion right in our doctrine
is hugely important. We want strong conceptions of both divine
sovereignty and human responsibility, both repentance and faith.
Imbalances here will lead to an imbalanced and messed up church.
What you put into the pot of conversion will become the soup of
the church.
     If your doctrine of conversion lacks a strong conception of
God’s sovereignty, your preaching and evangelism will risk becom-
ing manipulative and man-pleasing. Your approach to leadership is
more likely to become pragmatic. You will risk burning out yourself
and your congregation with an over-burdened schedule. Your mem-
bership practices will become entitlement or benefits based (like a
country club). Your practices of accountability and discipline will
mostly vanish. You will put holiness at risk. The list goes on.

91 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


      If your doctrine of conversion lacks a strong conception of
human responsibility, you are more likely to poorly steward your
own gifts, as well as your people’s gifts. You will more likely be
tempted toward complacency in evangelism and sermon prepara-
tion. You may be less likely to communicate love and compassion
toward those who are hurting. You might come across to others
as severe or pat. You might suffer from a weak prayer life, and so
forfeit all the blessings that could be yours. You will put love at
risk. The list goes on.
      If your doctrine of conversion lacks a strong conception of re-
pentance, you will be quick to offer assurance of salvation and slow to
ask people to count the cost of following Christ. You will more likely
tolerate worldliness and divisiveness in the church, and your church
members just might tolerate these things because many of them will
remain in the shallows of the faith. Nominalism will also be more
common because grace will come cheap. In general, the church will
like to sing about Christ as Savior, but not much about Christ as
Lord, and it won’t look much different than the world.
      If your doctrine of conversion lacks a strong conception of
faith, you will have a church filled with anxious, self-righteous, man-
pleasing legalists. The more self-disciplined members of the church
will feel self-deceivingly good about themselves, while the less-dis-
ciplined members will quietly hide away their secret sin and steadily
learn to condemn themselves and resent others. Transparency will
be rare, hypocrisy common. Outsiders and prodigals will not feel the
warmth and compassion of true grace. Cultural preferences will be
confused with law. The church will like to sing about the marching
orders of Christ the King, but not so much about a blood-stained
Lamb, a Lamb slain for them.

92 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Corporate Component of Conversion


      I’m broad-stroking, of course. Things don’t fall out quite this
neatly. But the basic idea in all of these examples trades on the tight
connection between conversion and the church. If conversion neces-
sarily involves a corporate element, or, more concretely, if individual
conversions necessarily produce a united people, then everything
else that you stick into your doctrine of conversion will dramatically
affect what kind of church you get.
      Do you want a healthy church? Then work on your doctrine of
conversion and teach all sides of it to your people. Make sure, fur-
thermore, that the structures and programs of your church cohere
with this multi-faceted and powerful doctrine.




93 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
              Connecting
         Evangelism and Church
                     JONATHAN LEEMAN




Is evangelism an individual sport or a team sport? Really, it’s both.
      Think of fishing. There are times you might saunter down to
the dock by your lonesome, dangle your feet off the side, and cast in a
line. But ask the men on an ocean trawler what it takes to haul a ton
of wriggling mackerel out of writhing seawaters. They desperately
need one another.
      The fishing analogy does not say everything we would want to
say about the relationship between evangelism and the local church,
but it’s biblical, and it’s a start. Jesus told the disciples to follow him,
that he would make them fishers of men, and then he sent them out
two by two to preach that people should repent (Mark 1:17; 6:7,
13). Like fishermen on a trawler, we need the church to do the work
of evangelism.
      Yet there’s a bigger picture to see in relating evangelism and the
church. Think of the first chapters of Acts, where the apostles pro-
claimed the resurrection, and behind them was the church, living
together and sharing everything in common, “praising God and enjoy-
ing the favor of the people” (2:47; also 5:13). Somehow, the life of the
church, sitting there as a backdrop to the proclamation of the gospel,
served as a witness to the gospel. It caused many in Jerusalem to view
the saints with favor, and it seemed to lead to more conversions.
      Was it these early days in Jerusalem that Peter had in mind
when he later described the church as a people, a priesthood, and a

94 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Connecting Evangelism and Church


nation “that you may declare the praises of him” who called us out of
darkness, and to live such good lives that pagans would see our good
deeds “and glorify God?” (1 Pet. 2:9, 12)
     In both the early chapters of Acts and 1 Peter 2, one gets the
feel of the church as a beehive, a buzzing ball of honey-making
sweetness, swarming with the comings and goings of busy worker
bees. The hive is essential to the individual bee’s work, and part of
the work. What might all this say about the relationship between
evangelism and a church?
     No analogy goes all the way and captures everything. Let’s see
if we might sum up the relationship between the church and evan-
gelism in the Bible in four systematic statements, and then ask what
practical lessons follow for churches.

1. EVANGELISM POINTS TO GOD,
NOT THE CHURCH
If you were trying to convince someone to join your club, you would
point to all the benefits of the club: the fun members have with one
another, the annual table tennis tournament, and so forth. This is not
how it works with evangelism and the church.
     Evangelism points to God, not to the church. That’s the first
statement.
     Paul tells the Corinthians that Christ had given him (and them)
a “ministry of reconciliation” and a “message of reconciliation.” He
(and they) were “Christ’s ambassadors, as though God were making
his appeal through us.” And this message of reconciliation is simple:
“Be reconciled to God” (2 Cor. 5:18–21).
     The evangelist’s good news is not, “Be reconciled to other
people,” even though the good news will lead to being so reconciled.
Rather, the evangelist’s good news is how a person can be reconciled
to God. Everything else flows from this.

95 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


2. THE CHURCH IS THE OUTCOME
OF EVANGELISM
By the same token, the first hoped for outcome of evangelism is
reconciliation with God. But there is a second hoped for outcome:
reconciliation with the people of God, the church.
      If your doctrine of conversion is missing the corporate element,
it’s missing an essential piece of the whole. A covenant head must
have a covenant people. Our corporate unity in Christ is not just an
implication of conversion, it’s part of the very thing. Being reconciled
to God’s people is distinct from but inseparable from being reconciled
to God (see my article “The Corporate Component of Conversion”).1
      All this is put on display wonderfully in Ephesians 2. Verses 1 to
10 explain forgiveness and our vertical reconciliation with God: “By
grace you have been saved.” Verses 11 to 22 then present the horizon-
tal: “For he himself is our peace, who has made us both one and has
broken down in his flesh the dividing wall of hostility” (v. 14). Notice
that the activity of verse 14 is in the past tense. Christ has already made
Jew and Gentile one. It’s what they are because God has done it, and
God did it in precisely the same place he accomplished the vertical
reconciliation—in the cross of Christ (see also Eph. 4:1–6).
      In short, we are saved into a people.
      The early chapters of Acts demonstrate what this looks like in
practice: “Those who accepted his message were baptized, and about
three thousand were added to their number that day” (Acts 2:41;
see also 2:47; 4:4; 6:7). People trust in Christ and are added to “the
number” of the church in Jerusalem. They are counted. Their name
gets added. If they had had cameras, a photo no doubt would have
gone into the church directory!
      The converted life is congregationally shaped. Christians be-
long in churches, and so this is where the evangelist will send people.

1 Jonathan Leeman, "A Corporate Component to Conversion," 9Marks Journal, June 1,
   2012, https://www.9marks.org/article/journalcorporate-component-conversion/.


96 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Connecting Evangelism and Church


3. EVANGELISM IS THE WORK
OF THE CHURCH
Third, evangelism is the work of the church. Once a person is recon-
ciled to God and (therefore) to God’s people, he or she gains a new
job: sharing the gospel with others. “Follow me, and I will make you
fishers of men,” said Jesus (Mark 1:17; also, Matt. 28:19). Every Chris-
tian and church member, in other words, is charged with sharing the
gospel (see Timothy Beougher, “Must Every Christian Evangelize?”2).
      The first chapters of Acts emphasize the preaching of the Apos-
tles, but when persecution broke out in Jerusalem and the church
scattered, “Those who had been scattered preached the gospel wher-
ever they went” (Acts 8:4).
      Local churches exist to worship God and share the good news
of Jesus Christ. This is why the teachers teach and the members
learn. In fact, Jesus gives the so-called evangelists, pastors, and
teachers to the church to equip them to do ministry (Eph. 4:11f ), a
ministry that surely includes evangelism.
      We work together to haul in the fish.

4. THE CHURCH IS AN APOLOGETIC
FOR EVANGELISM
The life of a converted people, grouped together in congregations,
should also commend the gospel that saved them. “Gospel doctrine,”
Ray Ortlund has written, “creates a gospel culture.” And that culture,
embodied in our churches, should be attractive to outsiders, at least
to some (see 2 Cor. 2:15–16).
     This brings us back to the picture of the church as a humming,
honey-filled beehive. We see this in Acts and 1 Peter 2. We also see it

2   Tim Beougher, “Must Every Christian Evangelize?” 9Marks, https://www.9marks.
    org/article/must-every-christian-evangelize/.


97 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


in Matthew 5, when Jesus talks about the church being salt and light
(vv. 13–16). And it’s remarkably pictured in John 13, where Jesus
observes, “Just as I have loved you, you also are to love one another.
By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have
love for one another” (vv. 34–35).
      Our good deeds toward outsiders and our love for our fellow
church members points neighbors and colleagues to Jesus!
      All that to say, the local church is an apologetic in evangelism.
The life of the church argues for the gospel. Believers living with one
another testifies to the power of God in salvation. As we sit under
the preaching of God’s Word week after week, and as the Spirit con-
forms us to the image of the Son little by little, we exemplify what the
gospel can do to us as individuals and as a people.
      Slowly, we are becoming the new humanity, following after the
one who is the firstborn of the new creation (Col. 1:15). And this
new humanity serves as a wonderful backdrop or billboard in our
evangelism. It offers a contrast culture to the cultures of this world.

PRACTICAL TAKE-AWAYS
What are some practical lessons we can take from these four sys-
tematic principles? Often, pastors try to strengthen a church’s
evangelistic ministry by exhorting people to share the gospel. Surely
that’s one piece. But it’s also critical to grow the church as a contrast
culture, which acts as this attractive backdrop for evangelism.

1) Evangelism should lead to baptism and membership.
Churches should not evangelize and then leave new converts out on
their own. Nor should they evangelize, baptize, and then, maybe, some-
day, get around to bringing someone into church membership. Except
for exceptional circumstances (e.g., Ethiopian eunuch), churches
should do what the church in Jerusalem did: baptize people into their

98 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Connecting Evangelism and Church


number (Acts 2:41). Baptism, after all, is the corporate and autho-
rized sign by which a church formally affirms a person as a believer.
That affirmation should then be protected and nurtured by the ongo-
ing oversight given through membership and the Lord’s Supper. We
don’t leave new hatchlings outside of the nest but bring them inside.

2) Teach members to integrate their lives
with one another.
In order to strengthen a church’s apologetic power, members
should constantly be reminded through the teaching of the word
and the celebration of the Lord’s Supper that we are one body (e.g.
1 Cor. 10:16–17; 1 Cor. 12). Hardly a Sunday should go by when
members are not reminded to build relationships with one another
so that they might encourage, build up, strengthen, speak truth,
warn, and love one another (e.g. Rom. 12:9–13; Eph. 4:11–32). They
should be exhorted to show hospitality (Rom. 12:13; 1 Pet. 4:9). All
this creates an attractive witness for the gospel.

3) Teach members to sacrifice for one another.
Even more specifically, Christians should think about how they
might better sacrifice for one another, financially and otherwise (e.g.
Acts 2:42–46; 2 Cor. 8–9; 1 Pet. 4:10). In a consumeristic nation,
especially, the example of shared generosity among believers pres-
ents a powerful contrast culture. Remember, Jesus told Christians to
love one another as he has loved us ( John 13:34)—a sacrificial love if
there ever was one.

4) Practice church discipline.
Christian hypocrites and heretics in our midst compromise the wit-
ness of the church. When the church members in a community are
known as liars, backbiters, and adulterers, that church’s evangelistic

99 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


work will not go so well. That’s not to say that a church should disci-
pline every saint who still struggles with sinning in their midst. Then
there would be no church left. Rather, churches should confront and
discipline unrepentant sin. This serves, ironically, to evangelize the
unrepentant member (see 1 Cor. 5:4–5), as well as a church’s city
more broadly (see 1 Cor. 5:1-2).

5) Equip members to share the gospel.
Church leaders should look for various ways to make sure every mem-
ber can explain the basics of the faith. This can be done from the pulpit,
the Sunday School classroom, the membership interview, and else-
where (see Kevin McKay, “Overcoming Objections to Evangelism”).3

6) Encourage members to live lives that bless outsiders.
Church members, hopefully, are known as kind, friendly, and quick
to lend a hand. We should be quick to jump in with a rake to help
clear the neighbor’s leaves, quick to offer help to an office-mate, quick
to defend a victim of abuse, quick to work hard at preserving the jobs
of hard-working employees in difficult times, quick to bless in all
sorts of ways. Good deeds should adorn our evangelistic words.

7) Invite people into formal and informal gatherings
of the church.
Countless stories could be given of how non-believers heard the gospel
and then watched the church in motion, both in formal or informal
gatherings, and then came to faith. The church’s life together com-
pelled them. It pointed to something they had never known in their
family, school, or workplace. In other words, inviting outsiders into the
life of the church surely must constitute one part of our evangelism.

3 Kevin McKay, “Overcoming Objections to Evangelism,” 9Marks Journal, https://
   www.9marks.org/article/journalovercoming-objections-evangelism/.


100 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Connecting Evangelism and Church


8) Set the example in evangelism.
Wherever a church’s elders are known for their evangelism, you can
expect to find an evangelistic church. Where the elders don’t, you won’t.

9) Feature evangelism and conversion stories.
Church leaders should pepper stories of evangelistic encounters into
their sermons and lessons. Church members should share prayer
requests for evangelistic opportunities. Baptismal candidates should
be given the chance to share their conversion experience. Things like
these all help to make evangelism a “normal” part of the Christian
life and the church experience.

10) Brag about your church.
The apostle Paul sometimes boasted about his churches as a way of
boasting about Christ (see 2 Cor. 9:2; 2 Thes. 1:4; cf. Phil. 2:16).
Christians, likewise, should look for ways to speak positively and
gratefully—not obnoxiously or pridefully—about their churches
around non-Christian friends. When a colleague asks about the
weekend, mention how your church gave your wife a wonderful
baby shower. Mention something encouraging the preacher said on
Sunday. Mention the work your congregation is doing at the shelter
when the subject of homelessness comes up. Doing this well, no
doubt, takes practice.

CONCLUSION
Rightly relating church and evangelism in our understanding and
practice requires more than exhorting people to evangelize. It requires
attending to matters of polity and governance, membership and dis-
cipline. It requires building a healthy church that sits under God’s
preached Word and knows what God has tasked the church to do.
      It requires godly leaders who teach and set the example. And it
requires members who love Jesus and increasingly can’t help but sing
the praises of him who brought them from death to life—inside and
outside the church building.

101 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
             The Problem with
           Evangelistic Programs1
                           J. MACK STILES




It doesn’t take much effort to convince most Christians that evan-
gelism with community is the way to go. It’s not even hard to find
people pulling together to accomplish an evangelistic task.
      But usually when we think of evangelism in community, we
think of evangelistic programs, which is not the same. By “program,”
I mean the occasional big event with a well-known speaker or excit-
ing topic. At some point during the event, there is a presentation
of the gospel. Or maybe the program is low-key, geared for seekers,
such as a service project or a sports program, with the hope that it
might open a door for a spiritual conversation.
      God can use programs. I know people who have come to faith
at evangelistic events. For the record, I often promote and speak at
evangelistic programs. But I don’t think programs are the most effec-
tive, or even the primary, way we should do evangelism.
      So, when you take a cold, hard look at programs, things just
don’t add up. For one, there is an inverse economic bang for the
buck: the more money spent on the programs, the less fruit from
evangelism. So, for example, when people under 21 (when most
people come to faith) were asked how they came to be born again,

1 Editor’s Note: This article is a lightly adapted excerpt from Mack’s book from
   the 9Marks Building Healthy Churches series: (Crossway, 2013). It’s the third of
   three excerpts. The first is “How Should We Define Evangelism?” The second is
   “Definitions: Gospel and Persuade.”


102 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Problem with Evangelistic Programs


only one percent said it was through TV or other media, while a
whopping 43 percent said they came to faith through a friend or
family member. Just think of the cost comparison between a cup
of coffee and TV programming. Or think of the effect: moms lead
more people to Jesus than programs.
     Oddly, it seems evangelistic programs do other things better
than evangelism: they produce community among Christians who
take part in them, they encourage believers to take a stand for Christ,
and they can enable churches to break into new places of ministry.
     Yet we seem to have an insatiable hunger for programs to ac-
complish evangelism. Why? Programs are like sugar. They’re tasty,
even addictive. However, it takes away a desire for more healthy
food. Though it provides a quick burst of energy, over time it makes
you flabby, and a steady diet will kill you.
     A strict diet of evangelistic programs produces malnourished
evangelism. Just as eating sugar can make us feel as if we’ve eaten
when we haven’t, programs can often make us feel as if we’ve done
evangelism when we haven’t. So we should have a healthy unease
with programs. We should use them strategically but in moderation,
remembering that God did not send an event, he sent his Son.
     What should we do? We want to have evangelism in communi-
ty. We long to have friends alongside us when we share our faith. But
at the same time, we see the limits, even the dangers, of programs. Is
there some alternative?
     I would like to make a case for something completely different,
something that is both communal and personal: a culture of evange-
lism centered in the local church.

THE CHURCH AND EVANGELISM
Jesus said, “By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if
you have love for one another” ( John 13:35). A little later, during the

103 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


same time with his disciples, he prayed that they would be unified,
“so that the world may believe that you have sent me” ( John 17:20–
21). Understand this: Jesus says the love we have for one another in
the church is a statement that we are truly converted. And when we
are unified in the body, we show to the world that Jesus is the Son of
God. Love confirms our discipleship. Unity confirms Christ’s deity.
What a powerful witness!
      There are many passages that instruct and shape our evangelis-
tic efforts, but these verses are the biblical foundation that show us
that the church is to be a culture of evangelism.
      This means that the local church is the gospel made visible. If
we are to picture the gospel in our love for one another, that needs
to take place in a local congregation of people who have covenanted
together in love to be a church. It’s not abstract love but love for real
people in the real world. I can’t tell you how many times I have heard
from non-Christians that the church was strange to them, but what
drew them into the fellowship was the love among the members.
      But the gospel is pictured not just in our love. Have you ever
thought of how many biblical instructions God has built into the
fabric of the church that, if done correctly, serve as proclamations
of the gospel?
      In pursuing a healthy culture of evangelism, we don’t remake
the church for evangelism. Instead, we allow the things that God has
already built into the church to proclaim the gospel. Jesus did not
forget the gospel when he built the church.
      For instance, baptism pictures the death, burial, and resurrec-
tion of Jesus. It shows how his death is our death and his life our life.
The Lord’s Supper proclaims the death of Christ until he returns
and prompts us to confess our sins and experience forgiveness anew.
When we pray, we pray the truths of God. When we sing, we sing

104 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Problem with Evangelistic Programs


the great things God has done for us through the gospel. When we
give financially, we’re giving to advance the gospel message. And of
course the preaching of the Word brings the gospel.
      In fact, the preaching of the Word is what forms the church to
begin with. And, once formed, the church is given the task of mak-
ing disciples, who then are sent to preach the gospel to form new
churches. This cycle has been happening since Jesus ascended into
heaven and will continue until he returns.
      A culture of evangelism is grassroots, not top-down. In a cul-
ture of evangelism, people understand that the main task of the
church is to be the church. We can see that church practices are a
witness in and of themselves, and certainly the church supports and
prays for outreach and evangelistic opportunities, but the church’s
role is not to run programs. The church should cultivate a culture of
evangelism. The members are sent out from the church to do evan-
gelism. I know this may seem a bit picky, but it’s really important. If
you don’t get this right, you can subvert the church—and be wrongly
angry with church leadership.
      So, in a healthy culture of evangelism, it’s understood that there
is a different priority for the church and for the individual. We need
churches that live out the gospel in the way the Bible describes, and
we need seeker-friendly Christians, not the other way around. That
means that something you should do in evangelism personally might
not be the best thing for the church to do as a whole.
      In a culture of evangelism, the goal is for everyone to share, pray,
and take opportunities as they come—not just the pastor and elders.
Our responsibility is to be faithful witnesses—together.
      I believe that if members spent half the time they had spent
on programs in friendly evangelistic conversations with neighbors,
co-workers, or fellow students, they would see a better response to

105 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
3. CONVERSION AND EVANGELISM


the gospel and reach even more people. If you think about it, there
is no way you could ever fit into your church sanctuary all the non-
Christians with whom the members of your church are in contact
weekly—no matter how big the sanctuary.
     The fact is, most people come to faith through the influence of
family members, small-group Bible studies, or a conversation with a
friend after a church service: Christians intentionally talking about
the gospel.




106 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
4. Church
   Membership
WHAT IS IT?
According to the Bible, church membership is a commitment every
Christian should make to attend, love, serve, and submit to a local
church.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• Throughout the Old Testament, God made a clear distinction
  between his people and the world. The New Testament Apostles
  then insist on this same distinction (Lev. 13:46, Num. 5:3,
  Deut. 7:3; 2 Cor. 6:14–7:1).
• Jesus taught that entering the kingdom of God involves be-
  ing bound to the church “on earth,” which is the local church
  (Matt. 16:16–19; 18:17–19).
• The first church began at Pentecost when people were baptized
  and “added to their number” (Acts 2:41). After baptism, partici-
  pation in the Lord’s Supper then indicates who belongs to the
  body of Christ (1 Cor. 10:17).
• Most of the epistles are then written to known quantities of
  people, such as “to the church of God that is in Corinth” and “to
  the churches of Galatia.” These are not random crowds but iden-
  tified and marked off groups of individuals who would identify
  as those churches.
• The New Testament explicitly refers to some people being “in-
  side” the church and others being “outside” the church. It also
  speaks of “removing” people from the church and a punishment
  by the majority (1 Cor. 5:2, 12–13; 2 Cor. 2:6).
• The New Testament contains dozens of “one another” commands
  which fill out our understanding of what church membership
  should practically look like.

107 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Biblical church membership is important because it is through the
church that God testifies of himself and displays his glory to the
world. In the church’s membership, then, non-Christians should see
in the lives of God’s changed people that God is holy and gracious
and that his gospel is powerful to save and transform sinners.




108 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
              Church Membership
            Is an Office and a Job1
                       JONATHAN LEEMAN




Christians have a long tradition of referring to elders and deacons as
church “officers.” The nomenclature rightly recognizes the role and
responsibilities that Scripture gives to our leaders. It also points to
the honor due to pastors (1 Tim. 5:17). People show respect to of-
ficers, right?
      I don’t want to downplay any of this.
      But . . . church membership is an office, too. It’s a job that comes
with authority and responsibility. We can call a lieutenant an “officer”
without diminishing the honor due to a general.
      What’s at stake here is not just academic, but pastoral and bib-
lical. Too many Christians today view their relationship with the
local church consumeristically—as if churches were gas stations.
You drive around once a week looking to fill your tank spiritually.
You find the station with the lowest prices and the car wash option.
Maybe you join the rewards program. Church membership is that
rewards program. Loyalty to their brand brings extra benefits.
      People often say “Church membership is not in the Bible” because
they have something programmatic like this in mind. And they’re half
right: this isn’t in the Bible. But they miss what is in the Bible. There,
church membership is a job. You’re expected to show up for work

1 Author’s note: To think further on this topic, see the very short Understanding the
   Congregation’s Authority (B&H). For a more thorough academic treatment, see
   Don’t Fire Your Church Members (B&H Academic).


109 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
4. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP


(Heb. 10:24–25). You have authority to exercise, tasks to complete,
privileges to enjoy, a corporate reputation to protect, risks to endure,
and profits to share. If anything, we need to think less like consumers
and more like owners. You’ve bought in. You have a vested stake.

WHAT’S AN OFFICE
The Presbyterian Charles Hodge defined an office like this:

       The ministry is properly an office, because it is something which cannot
       be assumed at pleasure by any and every one. A man must be appointed
       thereto by some competent authority. It involves not only the right, but the
       obligation to exercise certain functions, or to discharge certain duties; and
       it confers certain powers or prerogatives, which other men are bound to
       recognize and respect.2


     So it is with every church member. Not everyone can be a church
member. Only the repenting and believing and baptized can be.
     No person possesses the authority to make him or herself a
member. The church itself must.
     And no member is without functions, duties, powers, or
prerogatives. Every member possesses them, which others must
recognize and respect.

WHERE DID THIS OFFICE COME FROM?
Here’s the biblically interesting part: the office of church member is
the new covenant version of Adam’s everyman office, assigned to us
by Christ.
     God put Adam to work as a priest-king and tasked him with
watching over and working the garden. “Expand the Garden, Adam.

2   Charles Hodge, Discussions in Church Polity (1878; repr., New York: Westminster Pub-
    lishing House, 2001), 346.


110 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Church Membership Is an Office and a Job


Obey my words. And keep lying serpents out, since the Garden is
where I, the Lord, dwell.”
       When Adam failed, the job of priest-king went to Noah, then
Abraham, and eventually the nation of Israel. The mom-and-pop
shop went corporate as a “kingdom of priests” (Ex. 19:6). At the same
time, God separated out a class of priests and a class of kings to make
their respective responsibilities clear. The priest’s job, like Adam’s in
the garden, was to “work” and “watch over” the tabernacle/temple,
keeping it consecrated to the Lord (Num. 3:7–8; 8:26; 18:5–6).
They were charged with naming things as clean and unclean, holy
and unholy. The king’s work, meanwhile, was to establish order and
dominion while following God’s law (see Deut. 17:14–20).
       When Israel failed in its corporate job and the kings and priests
in their individual jobs, the prophets promised the special media-
tory offices of priest and king would be “democratized” once more
( Jer. 31:33–34). Christ would come as the perfect priest and king,
the second federal Adam, and through the new covenant of his
blood reassign a new covenant people with being:

     •    A chosen race—new Adams
     •    A royal priesthood—a democracy of priest-kings
     •    A holy nation—a new Israel
     •    A people for God’s own possession (1 Pet. 2:9)

     These priests should offer sacrifices of obedience in all of life,
their daily activities serving as a mediating witness to the world
(see Rom. 12:1–2; 1 Pet. 2:5). Yet they also constitute the temple
where God dwells, just as he dwelt in the Garden and the tabernacle
(1 Cor. 3:16–17), which means they possess a priestly obligation
to one another: to make sure they’re not unequally yoked, to come
out and be separate, and to touch no unclean thing, so that holiness

111 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
4. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP


comes to completion (2 Cor. 6:14–7:1). To this end, they employ
the keys of the kingdom in priestly fashion. This enables them to
keep the line between the inside and the outside of God’s people
clear (Matt. 16:19; 18:15–20).
      Meanwhile, every member of the church has been given a kingly
task: to make disciples and be ambassadors of reconciliation, bring-
ing the territory of hearts into subjugation to God (Matt. 28:18–20;
2 Cor. 5:18–20).
      What is church membership? It’s undertaking Adam’s job,
thanks to our inclusion in Christ. It’s the public recognition that
we have stepped into the office of priest-king. “Expand the church,
church member. Obey my words. Give witness to me in all of life.
And do not recognize lying serpents as members, since the church is
where I, the Lord, dwell.”
      Irenaeus put it succinctly one hundred years after the New Tes-
tament was written: “For all the righteous possess the priestly order
[sacerdotali ordinem]” (Against Heresies).
      Almost two millennia later Herman Bavinck said something
similar: “And just as all believers have a gift, so also they all hold an
office. Not only in the church as organism but also in the church as
institution, they have a calling and a task laid on them by the Lord”
(Reformed Dogmatics, 4.375).

WHAT’S THE MEMBER’S JOB?
That’s the biblical-theological backdrop. Concretely, then, what is
the authority and work of every church member? Our work is to
share and protect the gospel, and it’s to affirm and oversee gospel
professors—church members.
     Think about Paul’s “amazement” in Galatians 1: “I am amazed
that you are so quickly . . . turning to a different gospel” (v. 6). He
rebukes not the pastors, but the members, and tells them to reject

112 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Church Membership Is an Office and a Job


even apostles or angels who teach a false gospel. They were supposed
to have protected the gospel.
      Or think of Paul’s astonishment in 1 Corinthians 5: the Cor-
inthians were accepting sin “not tolerated even among pagans” (v.
1). “You are to remove the one who has done this thing,” he says to
the whole church (1 Cor. 5:2). He even describes how this should
happen—not on Thursday evening behind the closed doors of an
elders meeting, but when the whole church gathered and could act
together: “When you are assembled in the name of the Lord Jesus,
with my spirit present and with the power of the Lord Jesus, hand
this man over to Satan so that his spirit may be saved” (vv. 4–5). The
power of the Lord Jesus is actually there when they’re assembled in
his name. With that power, they were supposed to have protected
the gospel by removing the man from membership.
      Every member of a church should recognize, “It’s my respon-
sibility to protect the gospel, and it’s my responsibility to receive
and dismiss members. Jesus has given it to me.” To use the business
lingo again, we’re all owners. We all have a share in the losses and
the profits.
      Therefore, pastors who fire church members from this job,
whether by formal church structure or by turning them into con-
sumers, undermine the members’ sense of inclusion and ownership.
They cultivate complacency, nominalism, and eventually theological
liberalism. Kill church membership today and you can expect bibli-
cal compromises tomorrow.
      Of course, the job here is bigger than showing up at members’
meetings and voting on new members. The church member’s job
lasts all seven days. Ours is the work of representing Jesus and pro-
tecting his gospel in each other’s lives every day.

113 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
4. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP


     So we must study and work to know the gospel better and bet-
ter. We must study the gospel’s implications and consider how they
relate to repentance. Further, we must work to know and be known
by our fellow members seven days a week. We cannot affirm and give
oversight to a people we don’t know, not with integrity anyhow. We
try to start including more of our fellow members into the regular
rhythm of our lives. This is not a gas station rewards program: fill
out a form and drive away.

WHAT’S THE PASTOR’S JOB?
What then shall we say about the pastor’s office? What’s his job?
      Ephesians 4 says it’s the job of the pastors to equip the saints
for the ministry of building up the church (vv. 11–16). Notice
the two jobs in this passage. Job one is the pastors’: equip the
saints. Job two is the members’: the ministry of building up the
body of Christ.
      The weekly church gathering, then, is a time of job training. It’s
when those in the office of pastor equip those in the office of mem-
ber to know the gospel, to live by the gospel, to protect the church’s
gospel witness, and to extend the gospel’s reach into one another’s
lives and among outsiders. If Jesus tasks members with affirming
and building up one another in the gospel, he tasks pastors with
training them to do this. If the pastors don’t do their jobs very well,
neither will the members.
      When you put the pastor’s office together with the member’s
office, what do you get? Jesus’s discipleship program.

CONCLUSION
When someone wants to join the church where I pastor, I’ll say
something like the following in the membership interview:

114 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Church Membership Is an Office and a Job


      Friend, by joining this church, you will become jointly responsible for
      whether or not this congregation continues to faithfully proclaim the gospel.
      That means you will become jointly responsible both for what this church
      teaches, as well as whether or not its members’ lives remain faithful. And
      one day you will stand before God and give an account for how you fulfilled
      this responsibility. We need more hands for the harvest, so we hope you’ll
      join us in that work.


    The membership interview is a job interview after all. I want to
make sure they know this. I want to make sure they’re up for the task.




115 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
     Meaningful Membership &
      Shepherding the Saints
                          JASON SEVILLE




Let’s begin with a parable:

      A man had a hundred sheep, and one of them had gone astray. As he sat
      out to leave the ninety-nine in search of the one he paused and thought for
      a moment. Wait, maybe I had ninety-nine to begin with. He turned back
      and went about his business. The End.


     Meaningful church membership is essential for shepherd-
ing because it gives shape to the flock and lets pastors know who
they’re responsible to care for. Church membership isn’t just a useful
tool in the pastoral tool belt; it’s the tool belt itself. In other words,
meaningful membership doesn’t exist alongside things like prayer,
accountability, sermon application, and discipleship as a way to
shepherd; rather, meaningful membership is what makes all of those
other things possible.
     Consider these ten ways meaningful membership has enabled
the elders at my church to shepherd our congregation.

1. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP IDENTIFIES
WHOM WE’RE RESPONSIBLE TO SHEPHERD
You can’t shepherd a nebulous mass of humanity. You might argue
that you can shepherd some of that mass. But, there will surely be
people on the fringes who go unnoticed and uncared for. Meaningful

116 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Meaningful Membership & Shepherding the Saints


membership helps us shepherd by delineating exactly who it is we’re
meant to be overseeing, so that God’s sheep receive the care they need.
     Meaningful membership makes pastoring a personal task. A list
of names on a paper doesn’t make membership meaningful. The im-
port for shepherding comes from what we know about each one of
those names. As people become members we hear conversion stories
and we come to know where they’ve struggled and what repentance
has looked like in their lives; we regularly receive prayer requests and
check in to see how they’re doing. Our shepherding has been greatly
helped by knowing which specific sheep we’re meant to shepherd
and by knowing specific things about those sheep.

2. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP PROVIDES A
PRAYER LIST
Pastors should understand that one of their primary responsibilities
is praying for their congregation. Of course, we pray more widely—
for visitors, for non-Christians who attend our church, for other
churches in our city, and so on—but we have the unique responsibil-
ity and privilege to pray for those under our care.
     A defined membership allows us to regularly and systematically
pray through our entire membership. My pastoral assistant collects
prayer requests from the next section of our membership directory,
and we pray for each person one by one. This practice mutually
encourages both elders and church members alike. It reveals to the
elders where there are needs, joys, struggles, and opportunities to
serve. It reminds our members that we care, we’re praying, and we’re
available to help.

117 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
4. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP


3. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP FOCUSES OUR
DISCIPLESHIP EFFORTS
While we can proclaim the Word of God to and pray broadly for
all who attend our Sunday service, we can’t intentionally disciple
everyone. Meaningful membership, however, focuses our disciple-
ship efforts so that our elders aren’t expending all their energies with
folks who may just be passing through. That’s not to say we never
counsel or invest in someone who isn’t a member. But membership
enables us to pour resources into equipping the saints who are truly
covenanted with our local church.

4. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP REVEALS
THOSE WHO MIGHT BE IN DANGER
As the parable above illustrates, without meaningful membership,
it’s far easier for someone to wander off into trouble. If someone
visits my church and then disappears, I assume that they’re in an-
other church or they were temporary tourists in our city. Or maybe
they were just curious non-Christians popping in for a week. But if
a member disappears, it shows up on our radar pretty quickly and
we’re able to check in and see how they’re doing. With meaningful
membership, it’s clear when someone begins to neglect the gather-
ing. (Heb. 10:25)

5. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP REMINDS US
THAT ASSURANCE IS COMMUNAL
The fact that we have membership at all reinforces the reality to our
church that the Christian life is not meant to be lived in isolation.
We need each other. And none of us has the authority—or distance
from the deceitfulness of sin—to declare ourselves to be walking
in a manner worthy of the calling with which we’ve been called
(Eph. 4:1). Our security will come as we’re exhorted by brothers and

118 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Meaningful Membership & Shepherding the Saints


sisters every day until glory (Heb. 3:13). Shepherding is enhanced
and sustained as the church does its communal work of assurance.

6. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP SHAPES
SERMON APPLICATION
Knowing who “we” are has the very practical shepherding benefit
of directing sermon application toward a specific group of people.
Shepherding can’t be limited to pulpit ministry, but neither can it be
conceived of apart from the preaching of God’s Word. As pastors,
we write our sermons with our membership directory open, consid-
ering ways a particular text will interact with our particular people.

7. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP SUPPORTS
SERVICE IN THE CHURCH
Church members bear the privilege and responsibility of serving
in the church. Thus, meaningful membership encourages people to
serve and gives our deacons and other leaders a pool from which to
recruit help. The shepherding that takes place through small groups,
children’s ministry, hospitality, discipleship, and so on is all aided by
meaningful membership.

8. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP DIFFUSES THE
WORK OF SHEPHERDING
All of our members have publicly declared their faith in Christ
through baptism, given a testimony to how they came to saving faith
in Christ, and clearly articulated their understanding of the gospel
and its power in their lives. Thus, when someone on a Sunday morn-
ing wants to know more about Jesus, or be prayed for, or wants to
talk about how the gospel impacts their life, I can point them to just
about any member of our church with great confidence.

119 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
4. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP


     As pastors, we don’t have to be “the answer men” who bear
gospel ministry alone. No, it’s the church that is equipped to do the
work of ministry (Eph. 4:1–16). Ensuring that our members under-
stand the gospel and have a credible profession of faith greatly (and
rightly) eases the burden on the elders by letting the church do the
ministry it’s meant to do.

9. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP AIDS
FINANCIAL STEWARDSHIP
Church members bear the responsibility and privilege of financially
supporting the work of the local church where the Word of God
is ministered to them. If a Christian is never challenged to join a
specific local church, where should she give her money? If a Chris-
tian jumps from church to church, which elders should he consider
worthy of double honor? And if a church allows people to come and
go as they please with no formal commitment, then how should the
elders and deacons go about setting a budget for the operation and
mission of the church?
     All of this impacts shepherding more than you might think.
Adequate meeting space can be purchased or rented for worship,
counsel, classes, and pastoral study. Pastors can receive salaries so
that they can give their attention to the ministry of the Word and
prayer. Money can be allocated to help those who are in need. Such
financial stewardship—and the shepherding capacity that comes
with it—is weakened in a church without meaningful membership.

10. MEANINGFUL MEMBERSHIP EXTENDS
PASTORAL CARE TO DEPARTING SHEEP
Intentional covenant membership at our church helps us walk
with church members as they leave our church—whether that’s in
the unfortunate case of church discipline, the bittersweet case of

120 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Meaningful Membership & Shepherding the Saints


relocation, or the exciting case of missions or church planting. First,
we know they’re going out from us because we knew they were of
us. You can’t shepherd someone into a new season if you never knew
they considered themselves a part of your church. Second, we can
shepherd someone by proclaiming the gospel and lovingly calling
for repentance, as in cases of church discipline, or by praying for
and helping the relocating member find another gospel-preaching
church where they’re going, as in cases of relocation.
     We could say more. These ten ways just scratch the surface of
the great blessing meaningful membership has been to me and my
fellow elders. I pray you’ll experience these same benefits at your
local church.




121 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. Church
   Discipline
WHAT IS IT?
• Church discipline is the work of correcting sin in the life of the
  body.
• This can be done privately and informally. On rare occasion, it
  can also include a final step of excluding a professing Christian
  from membership in the church and participation in the Lord’s
  Supper because of serious unrepentant sin (see Matt. 18:15–20,
  1 Cor. 5:1–13).

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• The New Testament commands corrective discipline in
  passages like Matthew 18:15–17, 1 Corinthians 5:1–13, 2 Cor-
  inthians 2:6, and 2 Thessalonians 3:6–15.
• The New Testament also details formative discipline (our efforts
  to grow in holiness together) in countless passages which speak
  of pursuing holiness and building one another up in the faith,
  such as Ephesians 4:11–32 and Philippians 2:1–18.

WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Discipline is like the stake that helps a tree grow upright, the extra
set of wheels on the bicycle, or the musician’s endless hours of prac-
tice. Without discipline, we won’t grow as God wants us to. With
discipline, we will, by God’s grace, bear peaceful fruit of righteous-
ness (Heb. 12:5–11).




122 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                    A Church
                Discipline Primer
                   JONATHAN LEEMAN




What would you think of a coach who instructs his players but
never drills them? Or a math teacher who explains the lesson but
never corrects her students’ mistakes? Or a doctor who talks about
health but ignores cancer?
      You would probably say that all of them are doing half their job.
Athletic training requires instructing and drilling. Teaching requires
explaining and correcting. Doctoring requires encouraging health
and fighting disease. Right?
      Okay, what would you think about a church that teaches and
disciples but doesn’t practice church discipline? Does that make
sense to you? I assume it makes sense to many churches, because
every church teaches and disciples, but so few practice church disci-
pline. The problem is making disciples without discipline makes as
much sense as a doctor who ignores tumors.
      I understand the reluctance to practice church discipline. It’s a
difficult matter for any number of reasons. Still, this reluctance to
practice church discipline, a reluctance that many of us probably feel,
may suggest that we believe ourselves to be wiser and more loving than
God. God, after all, “disciplines those he loves”; and “he punishes ev-
eryone he accepts as a son” (Heb. 12:6). Do we know better than God?
      God disciplines his children for the sake of their life, growth,
and health: “God disciplines us for our good, that we may share
in his holiness” (Heb. 12:10). Yes, it’s painful, but it pays off: “No

123 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful. Later on, however,
it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace for those who have
been trained by it” (Heb. 12:11). A harvest of righteousness and
peace! That’s a beautiful picture.
     Church discipline ultimately leads to church growth, just as
pruning a rose bush leads to more roses. Said another way, church
discipline is one aspect of Christian discipleship. Notice that the
words “disciple” and “discipline” are etymological cousins. Both words
are taken from the realm of education, which involves teaching and
correction. Not surprisingly, there’s a centuries-old practice of refer-
ring to “formative discipline” and “corrective discipline.”
     My goal in this primer is to introduce the reader to the basics of
corrective church discipline—the “what,” the “when,” the “how,” and a
few more words on the “why.”

WHAT IS CHURCH DISCIPLINE?
What is corrective church discipline? Church discipline is the pro-
cess of correcting sin in the life of the congregation and its members.
This can mean correcting sin through a private word of admonition.
And it can mean correcting sin by formally removing an individual
from membership. Church discipline can be done in any number of
ways, but the goal is always to correct transgressions of God’s law
among God’s people.

Not Retributive, but Remedial, Prophetic, and Proleptic
This correction of sin is not a retributive action; it’s not enacting
God’s justice, per se. Rather, it’s remedial, prophetic, and proleptic.
By remedial, I mean it’s meant to help the individual Christian and
the congregation grow in godliness—in God-likeness. If a member
of the church is given to gossip or slander, another member should
correct the sin so that the gossiper will stop gossiping and speak

124 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Church Discipline Primer


words of love instead. God does not use his words to wrongfully
harm; neither should his people.
       By saying that church discipline is prophetic, I mean it shines
the light of God’s truth onto error and sin. It exposes cancer in an
individual’s or the body’s life, so that the cancer might be cut out.
Sin is a master of disguise. Gossip, for instance, likes to wear the
mask of “pious concern.” The gossiper might think that his words are
reasonable, even caring. Yet church disciple exposes the sin for what
it is. It exposes the sin both to the sinner and to everyone involved,
so that all may learn and benefit.
       By saying that church discipline is proleptic, I mean it’s a small
picture of judgment in the present that warns of an even greater
judgment to come (e.g. 1 Cor. 5:5). Such a warning is nothing if not
gracious. Suppose a classroom teacher gave passing grades to a stu-
dent’s failing tests throughout the semester for fear of discouraging
the student, only to fail her at the end of the semester. That would
not be gracious! In the same way, church discipline is a loving way to
say to an individual caught in sin, “Careful, an even greater penalty
will result if you continue on this path. Please turn back now.”
       It’s not surprising that people don’t like discipline. It’s hard. But
how merciful God is to warn his people of the great judgment to
come in comparatively small ways now!

Biblical-Theological Foundations
Behind church discipline is one of the grand projects of redemptive
history—the project of restoring God’s fallen people to the place
where they will once more image God as they extend his benevolent
and life-producing rule throughout creation (Gen. 1:26–28; 3:1–6).
      Adam and Eve were to image God. So was the kingdom of Is-
rael. Yet Adam and Eve’s failure to represent God’s rule, prompted
by the desire to rule on their own terms, resulted in their exile from

125 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


God’s place, the Garden. Israel’s same failure to keep God’s law and
reflect God’s character to the nations also resulted in an exile.
      As creatures made in God’s image, our actions intrinsically
speak about him, like mirrors representing the object which they
face. The problem is, fallen humanity distorts the image of God, like
wavy carnival mirrors. Since fallen humanity speaks lies, for instance,
the world has concluded that God’s own words cannot be trusted.
He, too, must be a liar. As goes a creature, so must go its creator.
      Gratefully, one son of Adam, one son of Israel, did keep God’s
law perfectly, the same one whom Paul would describe as “the image
of the invisible God” (Col. 1:15). Now, those who are united to this
one Son are called to bear that same “image,” which we learn to do
through the life of the church “from one degree of glory to the next”
(see 2 Cor. 3:18; Rom. 8:29; 1 Cor. 15:49; Col. 3:9–10).
      Local churches should be those places on earth where the na-
tions can go to find humans who increasingly image God truly and
honestly. As the world beholds the holiness, love, and unity of local
churches, they will better know what God is like and will give him
praise (e.g. Matt. 5:14–16; John 13:34–35; 1 Pet. 2:12). Church
discipline, then, is the church’s response when one of its own fails to
represent God’s holiness, love, or unity by being disobedient to God.
It’s an attempt to correct false images as they rise up within the life of
Christ’s body, almost like polishing smudges of dirt out of a mirror.

Specific Texts
Jesus grants local congregations the authority to discipline their own
in Matthew 16:16–19 and 18:15–20. The power of the keys for
binding and loosing on earth, first mentioned in Matthew 16:19, are
handed to the local congregation in Matthew 18:15–20, which we’ll
consider more carefully below.

126 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Church Discipline Primer


     Paul describes the processes of church discipline in a number of
places, including 1ºCorinthians 5, 2 Corinthians 2:6, Galatians 6:1,
Ephesians 5:11, 1 Thessalonians 5:14, 2 Thessalonians 3:6–15,
1 Timothy 5:19–20, 2 Timothy 3:5, and Titus 3:9–11.
     John refers to a kind of discipline in 2 John 10. Jude seems to have
it mind in Jude 22 and 23. More examples could be mentioned. Really,
church discipline is what Jesus and the biblical authors have in mind
every time they tell their listeners to correct sin in their lives together.

WHEN SHOULD A CHURCH
PRACTICE DISCIPLINE?
When should a church practice discipline? The short answer is
when someone sins. But the answer might differ depending on
whether we’re talking about informal or formal church discipline,
to use Jay Adams distinction between private confrontations and
public church-wide confrontations.
     Any sin, whether of a serious or non-serious nature, might elicit
a private rebuke between two brothers or sisters in the faith. That’s
not to say we should rebuke every single sin that a fellow church
member commits. It’s simply to say that every sin, no matter how
small, falls into the realm of what two Christians may lovingly raise
with one another in a private setting, prudence depending.
     When we turn to the question of which sins require formal
or church-wide corrective discipline, we need to tread a little more
carefully.

Biblical Lists
Some of the older theologies presented lists of when it’s appropri-
ate to conduct formal discipline. For instance, the Congregationalist
minister John Angell James said that five kinds of offenses should
be disciplined: (i) all scandalous vices and immoralities (e.g.,

127 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


1 Cor. 5:11–13); (ii) the denial of Christian doctrine (e.g. Gal. 1:8;
2 Tim. 2:17–21; 1 Tim. 6:3–5; 2 John 10f ); (iii) the stirring up of
division (Titus 3:10); (iv) the failure to provide for one’s near rela-
tives when they are in need (e.g. 1 Tim. 5:8); (v) and unreconciled
enmity (e.g. Matt. 18:7).1
     These types of biblical lists can be helpful to a point. Notice
that each of the sins described are both serious and have an outward
manifestation. They’re not just inward sins of the heart; they can
be seen with the eyes or heard with the ears. And in that outward
manifestation they mislead both the world and other sheep about
Christianity.
     Yet what such lists fail to do is account for the vast multitude
of sins which the Scriptures never address (what about abortion?).
Plus, texts on church discipline may only mention one particular sin,
such as 1 Corinthians 5 which discusses the sin of sleeping with
a father’s wife; but surely Paul doesn’t mean for churches to only
discipline that sin. How should churches extrapolate out from such
examples to other sins?

Outward, Serious, and Unrepentant
One way to summarize the biblical data is to say that that formal
church discipline is required in cases of outward, serious, and un-
repentant sin. A sin must have an outward manifestation. It must
be something that can be seen with the eyes or heard with the ears.
Churches should not quickly throw the red flag of ejection every
time they suspect greed or pride in someone’s heart. It’s not that sins
of the heart are not serious. It’s that the Lord knows we cannot see

1   John Angell James, Church Fellowship or The Church Member’s Guide, excerpted from
     volume XI of the 10th edition of the Works of John Angell James, 53.


128 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Church Discipline Primer


one another’s hearts and that real heart problems will eventually rise
to the surface anyway (1 Sam. 16:7; Matt. 7:17f; Mark 7:21).
      Second, a sin must be serious. For instance, I might observe a
brother exaggerate the details of a story and then privately confront
him over the matter. But even if he denies it, I probably wouldn’t
draw him in front of the church. Why not? First, something like the
sin of embellishing stories is rooted in far more significant and un-
seen sins like idolatry and self-justification. Those are the sins I want
to spend personal time discussing with him. Second, pursuing every
tiny sin in a church’s life will probably induce paranoia and propel
the congregation toward legalism. Third, there clearly needs to be
a place for love to “cover a multitude of sins” in a congregation’s life
(1 Pet. 4:8). Not every sin should be pursued to the utmost. Thank-
fully, God has not done so with us.
      Finally, formal church discipline is the appropriate course of
action when sin is unrepentant. The person involved in serious sin
has been privately confronted with God’s commands in Scripture,
but he or she refuses to let go of the sin. From all appearances, the
person prizes the sin more than Jesus. There may be one kind of
exception to this, which we’ll consider below.
      All three factors were in play in my first experience with correc-
tive church discipline. The person in question happened to be a good
friend and running partner. Yet both I and the church were oblivious
to the fact that he was engaged in a lifestyle of sexual sin, at least un-
til he told me one day over lunch. Immediately I asked him whether
he knew what the Bible said about such activity, which he did. Yet
he said that he had made his peace with God. I urged him to repent.
Others eventually did as well. But he said the same thing to all of us:
“God is okay with it.” After several months of such conversations,
the church formally removed him from its fellowship. His sin was

129 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


serious, unrepentant, and had a clear outward manifestation. It
would mislead others both inside and outside the church about what
it means to be a Christian. The church spent several months pursu-
ing this man. We loved him. We wanted him to turn away from his
sin and to know that Jesus is more valuable than anything this world
affords. Still, it was clear almost immediately that he had no inten-
sion of turning away. He was resolute. Given a choice between his
sin and the Word of God, he chose sin. So the church formally acted.

HOW SHOULD A CHURCH
PRACTICE DISCIPLINE?
How should a church practice church discipline? Jesus provides the
basic outline in Matthew 18:15–17. He says to his disciples,

      If your brother sins against you, go and tell him his fault, between you and
      him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother. But if he does
      not listen, take one or two others along with you, that every charge may be
      established by the evidence of two or three witnesses. If he refuses to listen
      to them, tell it to the church. And if he refuses to listen even to the church,
      let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax collector.


     Notice here that the offense starts between two brothers, and
the response should extend no further than it needs to go in order
to produce reconciliation. Jesus describes the process in four steps.

Four Basic Steps
1. If a sin problem can be resolved between the two people by them-
selves, then the case is closed.
      2. If it cannot be resolved, then the offended brother should
bring two or three others so “that every charge may be established
by the evidence of two or three witnesses” (Matt. 18:16). Jesus takes

130 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Church Discipline Primer


this phrase from Deuteronomy 19, which in context is meant to pro-
tect people against false accusations. Deuteronomy in fact calls for a
“thorough investigation” whenever there’s any doubt about the crime
(Deut. 19:18). I take it that Jesus, likewise, means for Christians to
be concerned with truth and justice, which may require due diligence.
The two or three witnesses need to be able to confirm that, indeed,
there is a serious and outward offense and, indeed, the offender is
unrepentant. Hopefully, involving other people will either bring the
offender to his senses or help the offended see that he should not be
so offended. Both this step and the prior step may occur over several
meetings, whatever the parties think is prudent.
     3. If the intervention of the two or three does not admit of a
solution, the offended party is then instructed to tell it to the church
(Matt. 18:17a). In my own congregation, this is typically done
through the elders since the Lord has given the church elders to
provide oversight in all the church’s affairs (1 Tim. 5:17; Heb. 13:17;
1 Pet. 5:2). The elders will announce the name of the party charged
with outward, serious, and unrepentant sin. They will provide a
very brief description of the sin, a description adjudged to not cause
others to stumble or to bring undue embarrassment on any family
members. And, typically, they will then give the congregation two
months to seek out the sinner and call him or her to repentance.
     4. The final step of church discipline is exclusion from the
fellowship or membership of the church, which essentially means
exclusion from the Lord’s Table: “And if he refuses to listen even
to the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax collector”
(Matt. 18:17b). He is to be treated as someone outside of God’s
covenant people, someone who should not partake of Christ’s cov-
enant meal (though he will probably be encouraged to continue
attending the church’s gatherings; see discussion below). Our own

131 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


congregation will take this step once the two months have expired
and the individual has refused to let go of the sin. Two months is an
arbitrary number, of course; it simply presents a basic timeline to
correspond with our church’s regularly scheduled members meet-
ings. In any given situation, the church might deem it necessary to
speed up that timeline or slow it down.

Why Slow Down or Speed Up the Process?
Sometimes the processes of discipline should move quite slowly.
This is the case, for instance, when a sinner shows at least some
interest in fighting against his sin. It’s not just the nature of the sin
which needs to be considered, it’s the nature of the sinner himself.
Different sinners, to put it bluntly, require different strategies. As
Paul instructs, “admonish the idle, encourage the fainthearted, help
the weak, be patient with them all” (1 Thes. 5:14). Sometimes it’s
not immediately apparent whether people are idle or indifferent
toward their sin or if they’re genuinely weak.
     I remember working with one brother involved in one kind of
addiction, and for a time I wasn’t sure if he was just making excuses
for his moral lapses or if his soul was truly weakened and malformed
by years of sinning, making it that much harder for him to stop sin-
ning. The answer to those kinds of questions should affect how
quickly the processes of discipline move.
     Sometimes the processes of discipline need to speed up, which
might mean skipping one or two of the steps described by Jesus
in Matthew 18. Two clear biblical warrants for speeding up the
processes of discipline are (i) division in the church and (ii) public
scandal (i.e., sin that will misrepresent Christ in the community
beyond the church). Regarding the first category, Paul says, “As for a
person who stirs up division, after warning him once and then twice,
have nothing more to do with him” (Titus 3:10). It’s not entirely

132 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Church Discipline Primer


clear what kind of process Paul has in mind here. But his words
do suggest that the church should respond quickly and decisively to
division-makers for the sake of the body.
      An even faster process is presented in 1 Corinthians 5, in
which Paul calls upon the church to immediately remove an indi-
vidual known to be engaged in a publicly scandalous sin, that is, a
sin of which even the non-Christian community disapproves. In
fact, Paul doesn’t even tell the church to warn the man in case he
might be brought to repentance. He simply tells them to “deliver
this man to Satan” (v. 5a).
      Why skip over the question of repentance and not give the man
a second chance? It’s not that Paul is uninterested in repentance or
second chances. Rather, he tells the church to remove the man so that
the man’s “spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord” (v. 5b). Surely,
Paul is open to the man eventually rejoining the church should he
indeed prove repentant (see 2 Cor. 2:5–8). But the point is, his sin is
publicly known and makes a public statement about Christ. There-
fore, the church should respond with an equally public statement
before the world: “Not acceptable! Christians don’t do this!”
      Having said that, it’s worth observing in 1 Corinthians 5 that
there was no question about whether or not the man was engaged in
sin. It was an uncontested fact. However, if there is a question about
whether or not a sin has occurred, even if it’s a scandalous sin, the
church should pause long enough to conduct a thorough investiga-
tion, as Jesus requires in Matthew 18. For instance, a church doesn’t
want to discipline someone for embezzlement (a publicly scandalous
sin) based on hearsay, only to have the secular courts throw out the
case three months later because of insufficient evidence.
      What then are the two considerations that might cause a church
to speed up the processes of discipline? A church might deem it wise

133 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


to move more quickly when (i) there’s an immediate threat to the
unity of the church body or (ii) there’s a sin which could bring great
harm to the name of Christ in the community. There is no precise
formula for establishing when one of these lines is crossed, and a
church does well to appoint a plurality of godly elders to give over-
sight to such difficult matters.

Attendance and Restoration
Church members often wonder whether a person who has been ex-
cluded from membership and the Lord’s Table can continue attending
the church’s weekly gatherings, as well as how they should interact
with him or her throughout the week. The New Testament addresses
this matter in a number of places (1 Cor. 5:9, 11; 2 Thes. 3:6, 14–15;
2 Tim. 3:5; Titus 3:10; 2 John 10), and different circumstances may
well require different responses. But the instruction given by the el-
ders in my own church generally falls under two points:
       • Except for situations in which the unrepentant party’s
         presence is a physical threat to the congregation, a church
         should welcome the person’s attendance in the weekly
         gathering. There’s no better place for the person to be than
         sitting under the preaching of God’s Word.
       • Though the family members of a disciplined individual
         should certainly continue to fulfill the biblical obligations
         of family life (e.g. Eph. 6:1–3; 1 Tim. 5:8; 1 Pet. 3:1–2), the
         tenor of church members’ relationships with the disciplined
         individual should markedly change. Interactions should not
         be characterized by casualness or friendliness but by delib-
         erate conversations about repentance.
     Restoration to the fellowship of the church occurs when there
are signs of true repentance. What true repentance looks like de-
pends on the nature of the sin. Sometimes repentance is a black and

134 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Church Discipline Primer


white matter, as with a man who has abandoned his wife. For him,
repenting means returning to her, plain and simple. Yet sometimes
repentance doesn’t mean conquering a sin completely so much as
demonstrating a new diligence in waging war against the sin, as with
a person caught in a cycle of addiction.
      Clearly, the question of true repentance is a difficult one that
requires much wisdom. Caution must be balanced with compassion.
Some time may need to pass for repentance to be demonstrated by
its fruits, but not too much time (see 2 Cor. 2:5–8). Once a church
decides to restore a repenting individual to its fellowship and the
Lord’s Table, there should be no talk of a probation period or sec-
ond-class citizenship. Rather the church should publicly pronounce
its forgiveness ( John 20:23), affirm its love for the repenting indi-
vidual (2 Cor. 2:8), and celebrate (Luke 15:24).

WHY SHOULD A CHURCH
PRACTICE DISCIPLINE?
As a church moves toward practicing church discipline, it will often
find itself facing real-life situations that are complex and have no
exact “case-study” in Scripture to help it sift through the various
layers of circumstances. It will not always be clear whether formal
church discipline is required, or how long the processes should take,
or whether the guilty party is truly repentant, and so on.
     As a congregation and its leaders work through these complex
issues, they must remember that the church is called, above all else,
to guard the name and glory of Christ. Fundamentally, church disci-
pline is about the reputation of Christ and whether or not the church
can continue to affirm the verbal profession of someone whose life
egregiously mischaracterizes Christ. The sins and circumstances of
sin will vary tremendously, but this one question always needs to be

135 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


in the forefront of our churches’ thoughts: “How will this sinner’s sin
and our response to it reflect the holy love of Christ?”
     After all, to care about the reputation of Christ is to care about
the good of non-Christians. When churches fail to practice church
discipline, they begin to look like the world. They are like salt that
has lost its saltiness, which is only good for being trampled upon
(Matt. 5:13). They are no witness at all to a world lost in darkness.
     Also, to care about the reputation of Christ is to care about
other members of the church. Christians should want to look like
Jesus, and church discipline helps to keep his holy picture clear.
Members are reminded to take greater care in their own lives when-
ever a formal act of discipline occurs. The Congregationalist James
sums it up well: “The advantages of discipline are obvious. It reclaims
backsliders, detects hypocrites, circulates a salutary awe through the
church, adds a further incentive to watchfulness and prayer, proves
beyond question the fact and consequences of human frailty, and
moreover, publicly testifies against unrighteousness.”2
     Finally, to care about the reputation of Christ is to care about
the individual caught in sin. In 1 Corinthians 5, Paul knew the most
loving course of action was to exclude a man from the congregation
“so that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord” (1 Cor. 5:5).
     Why should a church practice discipline? For the good of the
individual, the good of non-Christians, the good of the church, and
the glory of Christ.3 Keeping these basic goals in mind will help
churches and elders move from one difficult case to another, know-
ing that God’s wisdom and love will prevail even as ours fall short.




2   James, Christian Fellowship, 53.
3   See Mark Dever, Nine Marks of a Healthy Church (Crossway, 2004), 174-78.


136 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
       A Step-by-Step Primer for
           Church Discipline1
                            GEOFF CHANG




Church discipline makes sense when you understand what the
church is. If the church were a building, then discipline might involve
better property management. If the church were just an institution,
then discipline might be about organizational restructuring. If the
church were merely a weekly show, then discipline might require
better event planning.
     While those things play into our experience of church, the
New Testament is clear that the church is fundamentally a people,
a congregation marked by their commitment to Christ and to one
another. Therefore, when the Bible talks about church discipline, it
involves the spiritual care of people. It’s the process by which mem-
bers of a church guard one another from the deceitfulness of sin and
uphold the truth of the gospel.
     Church discipline largely takes place informally, as Christians
speak the truth in love to one another and point each other to the
grace of the gospel. However, in this fallen world, there will be times
when informal discipline will not be enough; there will be times
when those who belong to the church refuse to repent and continue
down the path of sin. It’s for these situations that Jesus provides in-
structions for church discipline:

1 Author’s note: For more detail on these questions, consult Jonathan Leeman’s Church
   Discipline: How the Church Protects the Name of Jesus.


137 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


      If your brother sins against you, go and show him his fault, just between
      the two of you. If he listens to you, you have won your brother over. But if
      he will not listen, take one or two others along, so that “every matter may be
      established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.” If he refuses to listen
      to them, tell it to the church; and if he refuses to listen even to the church,
      treat him as you would a pagan or a tax collector. (Matt. 18:15–17)


     Every single step of this process is an expression of Christ’s lov-
ing and wise rule over his church, and therefore every step ought to
be followed.

STEP #1: HAVE A PRIVATE CONVERSATION
It all begins with private confrontation (Matt. 18:15). As men-
tioned above, this happens regularly in the life of the church in all
kinds of contexts. The member who knows of unrepentant sin is to
go to the one who has sinned and, in love, call him to repentance.
Rather than fostering gossip and division, Jesus commands his
people to speak privately first, “just between the two of [them].”
And in God’s grace, so often this is the means by which God works
repentance among his people.
      But what happens if that initial confrontation is rejected? What
does it look like once we get beyond that informal step? Though
details will vary depending on the church and the circumstances,
below are five steps that church leaders should generally take in the
process of church discipline:

STEP #2: TAKE ONE OR TWO OTHERS ALONG
(MATT. 18:16)
The next step widens the circle of involvement, while not yet involv-
ing the church as a whole. Jesus instructs the members to take one or
two others along to confront the one caught in sin. If the elders have

138 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Step-by-Step Primer for Church Discipline


already been notified, it might be appropriate for one of the elders to
go along with the member making the charge. It’s also worth consider-
ing whether there might be another member of the church—perhaps
a trusted friend—to speak into his life. Ideally, this step would happen
in a personal meeting, but in certain situations, a phone call, voicemail,
or perhaps even written correspondence may have to suffice.
      Those involved up to this point should evaluate the response of
the one caught in sin and determine if there’s evidence of genuine,
lasting repentance. Of course, the goal isn’t perfection but rather
a heart that’s broken over sin and clinging to Christ, evidenced by
humility and a willingness to follow wise counsel. In many cases,
this step may take weeks, or months, or even longer. Often, it’s here
that God brings about repentance and reconciliation. But in some
cases, it will become evident to those involved that there’s no genu-
ine repentance and, in obedience to Christ’s instructions, the church
should proceed to the next step.

STEP #3: INVOLVE LEADERS OR ELDERS BY
INFORMING THEM OF THE SITUATION
Somewhere around step 2, maybe before, maybe after, a Christian
should consider involving a few elders or other leaders of the church
(like a small group leader). This might begin with a conversation,
but eventually the elders should have a way of formally receiving
charges (for example, the elders might require that the charges be
made in writing or they might invite the person to meet with one
or two of them). Jesus does not speak of the involvement of elders
in Matthew 18, but given the responsibility over the church that
the apostles assign to them in other passages, it makes sense that
elders would be involved in the process of church discipline at some
point. In more difficult situations, the elders will need to be involved
sooner rather than later.

139 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


     Here, the leadership has the responsibility to consider the na-
ture of the charges. Is the sin concrete and serious enough to warrant
taking the next steps of church discipline? Are there extenuating
circumstances that the member might not know? Are there other
members who might better speak to the one caught in sin? How do
we care for those who have been wronged? The leaders of the church
will need to think through these and other important questions, and
prayerfully shepherd those involved in the following steps.

STEP #4: GIVE ADEQUATE NOTICE TO THE
ONE CAUGHT IN SIN
Before making the matter public, the elders will want to make for-
mal contact with the one caught in sin. This is especially in cases
where there has been minimal contact with the elders, as when com-
munication has been rejected or most of the information has been
communicated secondhand. The goal of this contact is to explain the
charges and express their love and concern. If the person remains
unrepentant, then it’s necessary to notify them of when this will be
shared with the congregation. Given the need for clarity and preci-
sion in communication, the initial contact should probably be some
form of written communication, followed up by a phone call or a
personal meeting.
      If none of the elders have met with the one being confronted,
they should make clear that they want a chance to hear his side of
the story. If meeting with all the elders is too intimidating, they can
offer to send a smaller group of the elders. The goal in this step is
to give the unrepentant member a chance to meet with the leaders
personally and make sure there is no misunderstanding.
      If after this step it’s clear there’s no misunderstanding and there’s
still no repentance, then the elders should proceed to the next step.

140 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Step-by-Step Primer for Church Discipline


STEP #5: TELL IT TO THE CHURCH (MATT. 18:17)
At this point, Jesus commands the member to “tell it to the church.”
Though “church” has been interpreted in many different ways, Jesus
seems to understand the church to be a gathering of disciples in his
name (Matt. 18:20, see 1 Cor. 5:4). The church is the congregation.
In this step, the elders will communicate what’s taken place to the
congregation.
     Given the sensitive nature, it makes sense that the elders would
present this at a regularly scheduled members’ meeting, rather than
a public worship service. The elders need to think through carefully
what and how much to communicate about to the congregation.
They want to communicate enough so that the congregation un-
derstands what has taken place and the need for church discipline.
However, they should not communicate so much that it makes
returning upon repentance difficult because of public shame, embar-
rasses family members, or causes weaker sheep to stumble.
     Given the need for carefulness and precision, it’s generally wise
for the elders to craft a letter to be read at the meeting, rather than
trying to explain it extemporaneously. In some cases, the elders may
want to involve the member who initially brought the charges in
crafting the letter. After the elders read the letter, they should al-
low for questions from the congregation, and invite people to talk
to them privately if they have further questions. In more difficult
cases, the elders might consider holding a forum for members of the
church to bring questions.
     Having been apprised of the situation, the congregation should
be instructed to pray. Those in the church who have a personal re-
lationship with the one caught in sin should be encouraged to reach
out prayerfully. The elders will want to give the congregation enough
time to participate in the process of confrontation.

141 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
5. CHURCH DISCIPLINE


     This period may be the time until the next members’ meeting,
or longer if needed. However, in certain cases, the church may need
to act more quickly, perhaps even right away, if the church feels con-
fident about a lack of repentance (1 Cor. 5:1–5).

STEP #6: REMOVE THE UNREPENTANT
PERSON FROM MEMBERSHIP (MATT. 18:17)
After following all the previous steps, if the individual continues to
refuse to listen “even to the church,” then the elders should update
the congregation on the situation and bring a formal motion for the
congregation to remove him from the membership of the church. If
the vote passes, then the church needs to understand that they no
longer affirm this person’s profession of faith. They are to relate to
him no longer as one who belongs to the church but to the world,
like “a pagan or tax collector.”
      Following the removal, the elders should instruct the congre-
gation on how to interact with the individual. As someone under
discipline, the goal is not to shun him or to cut off all relationship.
Rather, members should relate to him as someone in need of the
gospel, yet who is self-deceived. In that sense, interactions are more
complex than relating with non-Christian friends who know they are
non-Christians. Any interactions should be used to call the person
to repentance and to remind him of the hope of the gospel. Mem-
bers should encourage him to attend the services of the church and
to sit under the preaching of the Word. And yet, at the same time,
they must avoid relating to him casually as if nothing has changed.
      After the meeting, the elders should send a written commu-
nication to the individual, informing him of the act of discipline,
and expressing their love for him and their desire for his repentance
and restoration. The elders should also continue to follow up with
the congregation in different settings (Sunday School classes, small

142 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Step-by-Step Primer for Church Discipline


groups, etc.) to see if there are any concerns or questions about what
has taken place. Church discipline can be a difficult time in the life of
a church, and yet it can also be used by God to bring about maturity
and growth. Elders should shepherd the congregation wisely both
throughout the process and after.

CONCLUSION
Church discipline would be easier if the church wasn’t made up of
people. But Jesus didn’t come for buildings or institutions or events.
He came to save a people for himself, sinners like you and me.
      It’s this reality that makes church discipline a wonderful gift.
The church is a gathering of those who through repentance and
faith have received the hope of Christ’s salvation and are helping
each other persevere in that hope. To neglect church discipline is to
fail to love one another in that way. So, as we labor to follow Christ’s
instructions for the purity of the church, we cling to the hope of the
gospel both for ourselves and for those around us.




143 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
6. Discipleship

WHAT IS IT?
The Christian life is one of growing in godliness (2 Pet. 1:7–10).
Growth comes not only by instruction, but also by imitation
(1 Cor. 4:16; 11:1). Therefore, churches should exhort their mem-
bers to grow in holiness and help others do the same.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• Peter exhorted his readers to grow in grace and in the knowledge
    of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (2 Pet. 3:18)
• Paul exhorted the Ephesians to grow by speaking the truth in
    love to one another (Eph. 4:15).
• Many passages in Scripture instruct us to imitate godly leaders
    (1 Cor. 11:1; Phil. 4:9; Heb. 13:7).
    The point is that, according to Scripture, all Christians should
grow in Christ, imitate other godly Christians, and encourage others
in their growth in Christlikeness.

WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Promoting biblical discipleship and growth is important because
none of us are finished products. Until we die, all Christians will
struggle against sin, and we need help in this fight. Moreover,
churches that foster cultures of Christian discipleship strengthen
their witness by offering the world a picture of what the gospel looks
like in action.




144 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
    Elders — The Church’s Lead
          Disciple-Makers
                        JERAMIE RINNE




Are you an elder in your church? Then you should be one of the
church’s lead disciplers. You knew that this was a key part of an el-
der’s job description, right?
     Let me back up just to make sure it is clear. If I had to pick one im-
age to best explain an elder’s job in the local church, the choice would
be a no-brainer: the New Testament predominantly portrays elders
as shepherds. Both Paul and Peter urged elders to shepherd their
flocks (Acts 20:28–31; 1 Pet. 5:1–4). The writer of Hebrews called
believers to submit to their leaders who “keep watch” over them “as
men who must give an account” (Heb. 13:17). Peter said that elders
serve as under-shepherds of the Chief Shepherd (1 Pet. 5:4). Many
of an elder’s duties—including teaching the Word, guarding against
heresy, modeling godliness, pursuing wayward believers, overseeing
church affairs, and praying for members—can be summed up within
the simple picture of a shepherd tending sheep.
     But what’s the goal of shepherding?
     Elders shepherd church members in order to help those
members grow up in Christ. Elders tend the flock in such a way
that believers develop from spiritual infancy to full-grown Christ-
likeness. Overseers labor in hope that the sheep will move beyond a
needy, self-focused, toddler Christianity to an adulthood of serving
Jesus and leading others to Jesus.

145 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
6. DISCIPLESHIP


     Paul identified Christian maturity as the reason Jesus gave vari-
ous leaders to the church, including pastors (i.e., shepherds):

      It was he who gave some to be. . .pastors and teachers to prepare God’s peo-
      ple for works of service so that the body of Christ may be built up until
      we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and
      become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ.
      (Eph. 4:11–13)


     When elders fulfill their duties well, believers will “no longer be
infants” but will instead “grow up into him who is the head, that is
Christ” (vv. 14–15). Elders should say with Paul, “We proclaim him,
admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may
present everyone perfect in Christ” (Col. 1:28).
     In other words, shepherding aims at making mature disciples.
What is disciple-making if not helping people progress toward ma-
turity in Christ?
     So as the church’s shepherds, elders should lead the way and
set the pace for disciple-making. All believers are called to the task
of making disciples, but elders bear an overall responsibility for the
discipleship work of the congregation.
     When elders grasp the goal of shepherding as disciple-making
and disciple-maturing, it will transform their ministry. Consider
how the goal of making mature disciples might impact five common
aspects of an elder’s pastoral work.

MATURING DISCIPLES THROUGH TEACHING
Elders must be able to teach the Bible (1 Tim. 3:2, 5:17; Titus 1:9).
God’s shepherds feed God’s sheep with God’s Word. And what’s the
point of feeding the sheep, except to strengthen and mature them?

146 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Elders — The Church’s Lead Disciple-Makers


     When an elder opens his Bible to teach fifty people at a Sunday
evening service, or twelve people at a home Bible study, or one guy
over a cup of coffee, he should not only focus on interpreting the
Bible well, though of course that is critical. Instead, he must also
look up from his Bible to see the people in their various stages of
discipleship, and then connect the Bible’s truths to his congregation’s
hearts, relationships, speech, and finances. He should strive to apply
the text in ways that ripen Christ-followers.

MATURING DISCIPLES THROUGH
PASTORAL CARE
What is the point of that elder’s hospital visit? Or why does he spend
an evening with the couple devastated by infertility or have breakfast
with the elderly man who recently lost his wife of fifty years? Cer-
tainly, he is there to encourage and comfort these hurting church
members. But he should also be there to promote spiritual growth.
      So instead of only asking, “How are you feeling?” and “Is there
anything the church can do to help?” a discipleship-minded elder
will tactfully ask questions like, “What do you think God is doing
in your life through this difficult experience?” and “Has God showed
you something about himself in the midst of your suffering?” He
will not only pray for healing and comfort, but also for God’s refin-
ing, sanctifying work.
      Suffering is perhaps one of God’s sharpest tools for chiseling us
into Christ’s image. Elders can support spiritual growth simply by re-
minding brothers and sisters that their suffering has a divine purpose.

MATURING DISCIPLES THROUGH HOSPITALITY
Paul twice says that elders must be hospitable (1 Tim. 3:2, Titus 1:8).
But let’s again view this elder task through the lens of making disci-
ples. When we do, we find that hospitality is about more than elders

147 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
6. DISCIPLESHIP


being friendly. Hospitality is also about elders making disciples by
being examples.
     An elder’s hospitality enables others to see that elder up close
in his natural habitat. They see how he relates to his wife, shapes
his kids, and works out his Christian faith in real life. Hospitality
facilitates an elder’s ministry of modeling maturity (1 Pet. 5:3). It al-
lows people into his life so that he can say to them, “Join with others
in following my example” (Phil. 3:17).

MATURING DISCIPLES
BY LIVING LIFE TOGETHER
Hospitality is just the beginning. Modeling maturity takes more
than a cookout; elders must open their lives to others. Just as ef-
fective shepherds must be among the sheep, so effective elders will
live life together with church members. Members need to see elders’
behavior in a variety of contexts, including work and play, ministry
and misery, success and setback.
     This may sound daunting to men with hectic lives and busy
schedules. But doing life together is not as much about adding more
to the schedule as it is about inviting others into what is already
happening. So if you’re an elder, include members into your normal
golfing or fishing, gaming or gardening. Commute together to work.
If you teach a class at church, bring on an assistant teacher to ap-
prentice with you.
     Elders should be able to say with Paul, “We loved you so much
that we were delighted to share with you not only the gospel of God,
but our lives as well” (1 Thes. 2:8). As elders share their lives, mem-
bers get glimpses of Christian maturity in high definition.

148 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Elders — The Church’s Lead Disciple-Makers


MATURING DISCIPLES THROUGH LEADERSHIP
Let’s take one more example: leadership. Elders lead a local church,
just as shepherds lead a flock. That’s why they are called “overseers”
(Acts 20:28; 1 Tim. 3:1; Heb. 13:17).
     But when an elder grasps the goal of making mature disciples,
he no longer sees “leadership” as merely sitting around a table making
decisions. He understands that leadership includes raising up more
leaders. The maturity-minded shepherd invites others into his life
to share in teaching and responsibility (2 Tim. 2:2). He will demon-
strate and delegate. A discipleship vision shifts an elder’s leadership
focus from policies and programs to training future shepherds.

WHAT’S THE POINT
OF MAKING MATURE DISCIPLES?
Why is it so critical that elders see disciple-making and disciple-
maturing as the goal of their shepherding? Because making disciples
isn’t really the ultimate goal.
      The ultimate goal for elders and the church is to savor and exalt
God and his glory. Both shepherds and sheep exist to reflect the im-
age and character of Jesus.
      So when elders shepherd in such a way as to grow up Christ-
like disciples, they are extending the reflection of Jesus’s glory in the
world. Making more and more mature disciples means there are
more people treasuring Jesus, imitating Jesus, and proclaiming the
good news about Jesus. Disciple-making shepherds labor to bring
glory to the Chief Shepherd himself.




149 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
         Discipleship According
            to the Scriptures
                         GARRETT KELL




My earliest memories revolve around fishing trips with my father.
He taught me how to bait a hook, cast a line, and land a catfish
without getting stabbed to death. But fishing wasn’t all I learned.
I learned about my father. I learned how he walked, how he talked,
how he joked, how he prayed, how he spoke to others, and how he
always thought about my mother on the drive home.
      More than fishing, I learned about being a man.
      To this day, the lessons I learned from my dad impact the way I
live and love others. What happened in my time with my father was
a form of discipleship. He led and I followed.
      What is biblical discipleship? Of all the questions Christians
need to wrestle with, this is one of the most important. Being disci-
ples of Jesus gets to the very core of who we are and what we should
be doing with our lives.
      In this article I suggest that discipleship—helping others follow
Jesus—flows directly from being a disciple of Jesus. Disciples are called
to follow Christ, and following him means helping others follow him.
      Are you a disciple that makes disciples?

DISCIPLES FOLLOW JESUS
When we encounter Jesus, we meet a man who calls us to come and
die (Mark 8:34–35). And he calls us to follow him and learn from
him (Matt. 4:19, 11:29). It doesn’t matter whether we’re smart or

150 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Discipleship According to the Scriptures


stupid, rich or poor, young or old, Asian, African, or American. The
only requirement is that we repent of rebelling against our Creator
and cling to him through faith (Mark 1:15; 1 Thes. 1:9). If we do
this, we’re promised forgiveness of our sins and reconciliation to
God (Col. 1:13–14; 2 Cor. 5:17–21). Jesus calls us to come and die
so that we might live.
      Those who follow Jesus by faith are known as his disciples.
Some suggest that disciples are the “super Christians” who are get-
tin’ it done for Jesus, while Christians are just “normal believers.”
Scripture, however, offers no support for this distinction. (See, for
example, Matt. 10:38, 16:24–28; Mark 8:34; Luke 9:23, 57–62;
John 10:27, 12:25–26). We are either following Jesus or we aren’t;
there is no middle ground (Matt. 12:30).

DISCIPLES IMITATE AND REPLICATE JESUS
At the heart of following Jesus is Jesus’s call to imitate him and
replicate him. As disciples, we are called to imitate Jesus’s love
( John 13:34), his mission (Matt. 4:19), his humility (Phil. 2:5), his
service ( John 13:14), his suffering (1 Pet. 2:21), and his obedience
to the Father (1 John 2:3–6). Since he is our teacher, we are to learn
from him and strive in the power of the Holy Spirit to become like
him (Luke 6:40). This growth in Christ-likeness is a lifelong en-
deavor that is fueled by the hopeful expectation that one day we will
see him face to face (1 John 3:2–3).

DISCIPLES HELP OTHERS FOLLOW JESUS
As we follow our Lord, we quickly learn that part of imitation is
replication. Having a personal relationship with Jesus is magnificent,
but it is incomplete if it ends with us. Part of being his follower is to
intentionally help others learn from him and become more like him.
As a friend of mine says, “If you aren’t helping other people follow

151 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
6. DISCIPLESHIP


Jesus, I don’t know what you mean when you say you’re following
Jesus.” To be his follower is to help others follow him.
     Being a disciple that makes disciples happens in two particular
ways. First, we’re called to evangelize. Evangelism is telling people
who don’t follow Jesus what it means to follow him. We do this by
proclaiming and portraying the gospel in our neighborhood and
among the nations (Matt. 28:19–20). We must never forget that
God has placed us in the families, workplaces, and circles of friends
that we are in so that we can proclaim the gospel of grace to those
who are destined to hell apart from Christ. We must help people
learn how to begin to follow Jesus.
     The second aspect of making disciples is helping other believ-
ers grow in Christ-likeness. Jesus has designed his church to be a
body (1 Cor. 12), a kingdom of citizens and a family who actively
build each other up into the fullness of Christ (Eph. 2:19; 4:13,
29). We are called to instruct each other about Christ (Rom. 15:14)
and to imitate others who are following Christ (1 Cor. 4:16, 11:1;
2 Thes. 3:7, 9). As disciples, we are to intentionally pour into other
disciples so they can pour into still others (2 Tim. 2:1–2).

DISCIPLES INTENTIONALLY
BUILD RELATIONSHIPS
Discipleship does not just happen. We need to be intentional about
cultivating deep, honest relationships in which we do spiritual good
to other Christians. While we can have discipleship relationships
anywhere, the most natural place for them to develop is in the com-
munity of the local church. In the church Christians are commanded
to meet together regularly, spur each other on in Christ-likeness, and
protect each other against sin (Heb. 3:12–13; 10:24–25).
     The discipleship relationships that spring out of this type of
committed community should be both structured and spontaneous.

152 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Discipleship According to the Scriptures


When we study the life of Jesus, we see that he formally taught his
disciples (Matt. 5–7; Mark 10:1) while also allowing them to ob-
serve his obedience to God as they lived life together ( John 4:27;
Luke 22:39–56).
     In the same way, some of our discipleship relationships should
be structured. Maybe two friends decide to read a chapter from
the Gospel of John and then discuss it over coffee or a workout at
the gym. Maybe two businessmen read a chapter each week from a
Christian book and then talk about it on a Saturday walk through
the neighborhood with their kids. Maybe two couples do a date night
together once a month and talk about what the Bible says about
marriage. Maybe a godly older lady has a younger single woman over
to her home on Tuesday afternoon to pray and study a Christian
biography. Maybe a mom spends time at the park with other moms
each week. Regardless of the format, some of our discipleship should
involve scheduled times of reading, praying, confessing, encouraging,
and challenging each other to become more like Christ.
     Discipleship can also be spontaneous. Maybe friends go to a
movie together and then grab ice cream afterwards to compare the
movie’s message to what the Bible says. Maybe a father and a son sit
on the porch and reflect on God’s glory being displayed in a sunset.
Maybe you invite visitors from church over for lunch and ask every-
one how they came to know Jesus.
     We always need to be intentional, but we don’t always need to
be structured. In fact, Deuteronomy 6 shows us that discipleship
happens “when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way,
and when you lie down, and when you rise” (v. 7). Every moment
presents an opportunity to discuss who God is and what he’s doing.
Since we are always following Jesus, we always have the opportunity
to help others follow him as well.

153 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
6. DISCIPLESHIP


DISCIPLES DEPEND UPON GRACE
While it is true that a disciple of Jesus ought to help others follow
Jesus, we must always remember that apart from the sustaining and
empowering grace of God we can do nothing ( John 15:5). Whether
you’re a pastor, a plumber, a policeman, or a stay-at-home parent,
you never graduate from your need for God’s grace.
     As we follow Christ and help others follow him, we’re
constantly made aware that we need grace. We fail. We sin. We
struggle. But thankfully, God’s grace abounds to his children. This
is good news as we seek to follow Jesus together and daily be trans-
formed into his glorious image (2 Cor. 3:18). May we faithfully
follow Christ and help others to do the same until we see his face.
Come soon, Lord Jesus!




154 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
7. Church
   Leadership
WHAT IS IT?
There are two church offices according to Scripture: elders and dea-
cons. Elders are to be godly, qualified men who serve as teachers and
shepherds of the church. Deacons, on the other hand, are servants
of the church, focusing on practical needs of members and the unity
of the whole body.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• Paul lays out the qualifications for elders in 1 Timothy 3:1–7
  and Titus 1:5–9.
• God gifts churches with elders to
  o feed God’s sheep God’s Word ( John 21:15–17),
  o guide the sheep (1 Tim. 4:16; 1 Pet. 5:3, Heb. 13:7),
  o and protect the sheep from attackers (Acts 20:27–29;
      2 Tim. 4:3–4; Titus 1:9),
  o while protecting both themselves and the church through the
      wisdom of their plurality (Prov. 11:14; 24:6).
• When the Epistles mention elders, they present them as a
  group or a plurality (Acts 14:23, Acts 20:17, 1 Tim. 4:14, 5:17;
  Jas. 5:14).
• The qualifications for deacons are found in 1 Timothy 3:8–13.
• While “the seven” are not named deacons in Acts 6:1–7, these
  seven individuals demonstrate the basic work of a deacon: (i)
  meeting tangible needs, (ii) bringing unity to the church, (iii)
  and supporting the teaching ministry of the elders.

WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Biblical eldership is important because through it God blesses the
church with instruction, protection, and unity.

155 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                     Elders: Lead!
                      BOBBY JAMIESON




In many churches, the elders aren’t really the leaders. But they
should be.

ELDERS WHO AREN’T LEADING
Scenario one: The elders are viewed as more of an advisory board.
They’re trustees, not teachers. They exercise some responsibility
over policies, personnel, and programs, but the only real leader is
the senior pastor.
      Scenario two: The elders don’t really lead the church because
the staff have taken over that role. The staff run all the programs.
The staff are most people’s point of contact in the church. If you have
a question or problem, you’ll turn to the youth leader or women’s
ministry director or discipleship coordinator.
      Scenario three: At the other end of the spectrum, these
theologically minded elders shy away from anything that remotely
resembles administration. Patterning their ministry on the apparent
division of labor in Acts 6, the elders devote themselves to the minis-
try of the Word and prayer and leave everything else to deacons and
other church members, from the church budget to the contents of
the worship service to the selection of books in the bookstore.
      In the first two scenarios, the elders need to grow into their role
as shepherds (1 Pet. 5:2) and ministers of the Word (1 Tim. 3:2).
      The elders in the third scenario are much closer to the mark,
but I would suggest that there are some ways in which they’re still
failing to truly lead.

156 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Elders: Lead!


ELDERS ARE LEADERS AND OVERSEERS
What does the Bible say about elders’ leadership?
   • 1 Timothy 5:17 (NIV) says, “The elders who direct the
      affairs of the church well are worthy of double honor, es-
      pecially those whose work is preaching and teaching.” The
      Greek term behind “direct the affairs” is proistemi, which has
      two basic meanings: (i) to exercise leadership, and (ii) to
      care for someone or something. The first is clearly in view
      here. The elders exercise leadership over the whole church. In
      other translations they “rule” or “are leaders.”
   • This word also shows up in 1 Timothy 3:4 and 12, where
      Paul says that both elders and deacons must manage their
      households well. Managing a household involves compre-
      hensive oversight, including making decisions, teaching,
      training children, setting a godly example, and competently
      managing finances. That this kind of leadership is a prereq-
      uisite for being an elder suggests that “administration” as such
      is not beyond the pale of elders’ responsibilities.
   • Further, another common term for “elder” in the New Tes-
      tament is “overseer” (Phil. 1:1; 1 Tim. 3:1-2; Titus 1:7).
      This Greek noun (episkopos) and its cognate verb imply the
      assumption of responsibility and care. Care for what? The
      church and its affairs.
   		 Therefore, what can look like delegation of administration
      may in fact be abdication of leadership.
   • What about Acts 6? True, the apostles devote themselves
      to the Word and prayer and refuse to allow administra-
      tion to usurp those priorities (Acts 6:1–7). But that’s just
      the point—they don’t allow administration to usurp those
      priorities. So, they exercise their leadership to come up with
      a solution that serves the church. They don’t just say, “Distri-
      bution of food? That’s not our job!”

157 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
7. CHURCH LEADERSHIP


      Taken together, these New Testament passages clearly teach
that the elders have a general responsibility to lead and oversee the
affairs of the church. That’s a broad, all-embracing responsibility.
Given their primary focus on teaching and attending to the spiritual
needs of the flock, elders shouldn’t allow administration to swamp
those priorities. Yet on the other hand, they shouldn’t abdicate lead-
ership either.
      In general, the extent of their involvement will vary depend-
ing on how closely the matter at hand relates to the ministry of the
Word and spiritual oversight.

PRACTICAL APPLICATION; TEACHING,
WORSHIP, BOOKSTALL, BUDGET
What does this mean practically?
     Preaching and teaching: The elders will likely do the ma-
jority of it, and they will exercise very close oversight over other
teachers who contribute. The elders should also exercise oversight
over the content that is taught in every area of the church’s life,
from small groups to children’s ministry to evangelistic outreaches.
This doesn’t mean the elders need to do all the teaching. But it does
mean that the elders as a whole have a special responsibility for
everything that is taught.
     Corporate worship: The elders are finally responsible for the
contents since corporate worship is a ministry of the Word. A non-
elder should not have full and final authority over what songs the
church sings. The elders may decide to delegate much of the work to,
for example, a theologically sound and musically gifted deacon, but
it should be clear to all involved—including the congregation—that
the elders are responsible for the contents of corporate worship.
     Bookstall: The elders should have the say over what books are
and aren’t included. After all, recommending books is an extension

158 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Elders: Lead!


of the ministry of the Word. They may assign one elder or a theo-
logically discerning deacon to manage the store, and perhaps do
most of the legwork for selecting titles. But the elders should have
veto power over what books are sold.
     The church budget: This is trickier territory. On the one hand,
the elders should work not to get bogged down in endless details. So
it makes good sense to farm out much of the legwork to one or more
deacons, or the treasurer, or other godly and trustworthy individuals
in the church.
     On the other hand, the elders should set the overall direction
for the budget since it reflects and embodies the church’s ministry
priorities. So the elders should lead the church in considering how
much money to give to missions, how much and what kind of staff
should serve the church, what local evangelistic ministries to partner
with and to what extent, and so on.
     Also, it takes godliness and maturity to ensure that pastors are
paid enough (1 Tim. 5:17; Gal. 6:6). Not every budget committee
obeys Scripture’s clear command to provide for our pastors’ needs.
     Thus, the elders should handle the aspects of budgeting that
most directly relate to spiritual oversight and the ministry priorities
which flow from the Word. And they should gladly delegate much
of the plumbing work to other godly church members, who perhaps
work together with a small subset of fiscally wise elders.
     Of course this is a difficult balance to strike in practice. But
my main point is that it should be the elders, not the deacons, or
treasurer, or some political cabal, who are “in charge of ” putting to-
gether the budget. As every leader knows, delegation is essential to
leadership. Leading doesn’t mean doing everything yourself. But the
budget should be, and should be seen to be, a matter in which the
elders lead and exercise substantial authority.

159 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
7. CHURCH LEADERSHIP


ELDERS: LEAD!
My basic point in all this is that the elders should lead the church.
This leadership flows from teaching the Word, setting a godly ex-
ample, and attending to the spiritual state of the flock. But it also
flows into all kinds of practical matters as those matters intersect
with the church’s theological vision.




160 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
  Our Church Wants a Plurality
  of Elders, but We Don’t Know
         Where to Start1
                          DAVE HARVEY




“A thrilling frenzy of restless exhilaration!” That’s how John de-
scribed his life as a church planter.
      Living Faith Community, the church he planted two years ago,
is growing faster than he ever expected. But people import problems.
Counseling, conflict, marriage issues, mission drift—it’s all dizzying
to John. He spent so much time preparing to start the church that
he never considered what it meant to shepherd or lead beyond the
planting. If you bumped into John around town, you’d probably de-
tect early signs of burnout.
      Recently, it dawned on John that he alone is carrying the burdens
for the church. Theologically, he’s convinced a plurality of elders what
Scripture holds out as best. John once aced a paper he wrote on elder
teams for his Doctrine of Ecclesiology class. But now he’s in the trenches
of a new church, and he has no idea where to actually find these men.
He wonders,“What does it even look like to put an elder team together?
How do I begin to transition leadership from me to us?”
      Transitioning to a plurality of elders is an urgent topic—for
both planters and pastors who don’t yet have this structure. Why?

1 Editor’s note: For more on this topic, check out Dave’s book: The
   Plurality Principle: How to Maintain Gospel-Centered Leadership in a Mul-
   tipastor Church (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2023), https://www.amazon.com/
   Plurality-Principle-Maintain-Leadership-Coalition/dp/1433571544.


161 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
7. CHURCH LEADERSHIP


Because the quality of your elder plurality determines in large part
the health of your church. It really is that important.
     So, with this in mind, here’s how pastors and church leaders can
kickstart the process.

1. TEACH, TEACH, TEACH
Make it clear that a plurality of men serving together is an essential
part of a flourishing church. The New Testament terms for pas-
tor, overseer, or elder are never used to talk about a single leader
ruling or governing the church alone. Show this to your people in
Scripture; point them to Acts 20, Philippians 1, 1 Timothy 4–5,
and 1 Peter 5.
      For many, the term “elder” smacks of a quaint relic, like the Na-
vy’s “quartermaster.” It sounds familiar, but unless you’re in the Navy,
you’d have to Google it. Even church members may only know them
as the guys who appear under the “Elders” tab on the church website.
      But being an elder is significant. In order to serve as part of
a healthy elder plurality, a pastor must learn humility. He must be
willing to come under authority, traffic in nuance, and consider his
gifts and position through the lens of what best serves the whole
church. Serving as elders together ought to draw men closer to God
and one another as they teach, lead, and care for the congregation.
      Pastors, teach your church to see the beauty and significance of this
biblical design. The strength, unity, and integrity of an elder plurality
infuses the church with vitality and sustainability. Where pluralities
experience depth and joy, churches grow in health and strength.

2. CONSIDER ASSEMBLING
A PROVISIONAL PLURALITY
There are many ways to do this. Perhaps assemble a leadership team
from men in the congregation. Make it clear their role is temporary;

162 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Our Church Wants a Plurality of Elders,
but We Don’t Know Where to Start


make it clear that they’re not elders, and it’s possible some of them
never will be. Nonetheless, these meetings offer a great context to
observe men who may one day be elders. So encourage them. Let
them know you still want to benefit from their counsel and friend-
ship. Also, it’s probably wise to place a time limit on this team’s
service so that there’s a natural endpoint.
     Here’s another idea for churches in the early stage of this: you
might invite an experienced pastor from outside your church to be
a part of this team. If you’re leading a church plant, perhaps ask a
pastor from your sending church. Not only does this maintain con-
tinuity and accountability, it provides less experienced men with a
framework for how eldership ought to function.

3. FAMILARIZE YOURSELF WITH TRAINING
MATERIALS THAT YOU CAN WORK THROUGH
WITH POTENTIAL ELDERS
Some helpful tools include the Study Guide to Biblical Eldership
by Alexander Strauch2, resources at Biblicaleldership.com, the
Basics of Church Eldership at TGC3, Gospel Eldership by
Bob Thune4, and the eldership training materials available through
9Marks5. My new book The Plurality Principle also has a free
study guide6.

2 Alexander Strauch, Study Guide: Biblical Eldership (Littleton, CO:
   Lewis       and      Roth         Publishers,    1997),      https://www.amazon.com/
   Study-Guide-Biblical-Eldership-Mentoring/dp/0936083131/.
3 “The Plurality of Elders,” in Basics of Church Eldership, The Gospel Coalition, https://www.
   thegospelcoalition.org/course/basics-of-church-eldership/#the-plurality-of-elders.
4 Robert H. Thune, Gospel Eldership: Equipping a New Generation of Servant
   Leaders (Greensboro, NC: New Growth Press, 2016), https://www.amazon.com/
   Gospel-Eldership-Equipping-Generation-Servant/dp/1942572611/.
5 Mike McKinley, “Raising Up Elders: Three Areas to Address,” 9Marks https://
   www.9marks.org/article/journalraising-elders-three-areas-address/.
6 Dave Harvey, Study Guide for The Plurality Principle (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2023),
   https://uploads.crossway.org/excerpt/study-guide-the-plurality-principle.pdf.


163 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
7. CHURCH LEADERSHIP


     Because ministry can quickly deteriorate to a tyranny of the ur-
gent, many leaders don’t prioritize training. But there’s nothing more
important for a new pastor to do than find a way to train elders. It’s
an investment into the church’s future since healthy pluralities lead
to thriving churches. But it will also help you! Appointing elders
who share the shepherding workload will free up big blocks of time.
And doing this will prepare you for my next encouragement.

4. MAKE ROOM NOW IN YOUR SCHEDULE
TO BE THE CUSTODIAN OF YOUR CHURCH’S
ELDER PLURALITY
As the senior leader of a local church, it’s your job to consistently give
yourself to the health of the team. The overarching role of the lead
pastor among the elders is to steward the group into a culture of care,
trust, affection, doctrinal growth, and honest burden-sharing. Setting
this example is particularly important at the beginning of a church.
      How do senior pastors do this? By actively serving, loving, and
shaping their fellow elders. By encouraging, celebrating, and stirring
up the team toward mutual service. This requires humble leader-
ship—listening well to feedback, graciously addressing others’ hurts,
readily confessing sin, and admitting when you’re wrong. This work
must be an ongoing and faithful practice—not merely once in a
while when you feel like it.

5. FINALLY, REMEMBER GOD’S GRACE
God is actively at work in your congregation pouring out his grace
upon men so they can become pastors and elders. When Paul un-
packs the qualifications for eldership in 1 Timothy 3 and Titus 1,
he often uses the present tense controlling verb “must be.” The elder
“must be” above reproach, sober-minded, respectable, and so on.
This verb tense carries throughout both passages.

164 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Our Church Wants a Plurality of Elders,
but We Don’t Know Where to Start


      This means Paul isn’t holding out a list of yet-to-be-achieved
traits. He’s talking about preconditions—qualities already present in
the men appointed. By using the verbs this way, Paul indicates that
the Spirit of God is actively at work in the church pouring out grace
on some men so that they will manifest these qualities. Elder train-
ing begins by recognizing an empowering process God has already
begun. Which means you need to have the eye to spot where God is
at work. You need to be able to see grace in the men of your church.
      So, when I meet church planters like John who are spinning
their wheels for God’s glory, I invite them to consider, “Which men
are the people in your congregation drawn to? Who is known for
their character? Who’s already influencing people for the right
reasons?” Then exhort him to believe this promise: God is so com-
mitted to the future of his church that he is already at work preparing
elders to lead it.




165 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
How to Separate Deacon Work
      from Elder Work
                    MATT SCHMUCKER




The Evil One loves to divide, and he often divides most effectively
along the lines of authority: husband and wife, parent and child, boss
and employee. This is true in the church as well. Whether between
the pastors and the congregation or within the church’s leadership,
division causes Christ’s church to suffer.
     One way this division creeps into the church is when issues
arise that don’t clearly fall to either the elders or the deacons.
     The goal of this article is clarify how to separate deacon work
from elder work. This will help to minimize division between elders
and deacons and thus preserve unity among the church’s leaders.

WHERE’S THE RUB?
Fights occur over issues that don’t clearly fall to either elders or
deacons. If it’s clear to all parties who’s responsible for something,
there’s no cause for dispute. But trouble occurs when it’s less clear:
Is this deacon work? Is it elder work? How much should the elders
comment on the deacons’ work? Can the deacons weigh in on the
elders’ conclusions?
     My answer is a rock solid, “It depends.”
     No deacon should object to the elders’ ability to pick Sunday
School teachers. No elder should argue with the deacons about the
furniture polish used on the communion table. If you have this level
of disputes in your church, you need to do some basic teaching about

166 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
How to Separate Deacon Work from Elder Work


what an elder is and what a deacon is. Your elders should know they
are responsible for the spiritual oversight of the church, and your
deacons should know they are responsible for the physical and mate-
rial needs of the church. If both parties don’t know that, start there.
      On the other hand, the tough cases are tough because the issue
falls on the boundary line between the spiritual oversight of the church
and its physical and material care, or the issue involves both domains.
      In order to try to sort some of these struggles out, let me give you
three brief scenarios where the jurisdiction issue is fuzzy, two sugges-
tions for bringing clarity, and two encouragements for the road ahead.

THREE FUZZY SCENARIOS
Here are three scenarios that seem to fall on the line between elders’
and deacons’ responsibilities:
    1. Babies are being born and the nursery needs to be expand-
        ed. Whose job is it, the elders’ or deacons’? You might think
        this is deacon work, but if the elders are doing their job well,
        they will have seen the growing need in the natural course
        of their shepherding. If you take in fifty new members over
        the course of two years who are single, the elders should
        expect to need an expanded nursery in five years or so! This
        matter will finally be resolved by the deacons through a con-
        struction project, but it should be initiated by the elders as
        they give oversight to the congregation.
    2. Ninety-year-old Mrs. Spandler turned her car keys over
        to her daughter and can’t get around like she used to. You
        might think the responsibility for getting her to church falls
        to the elders, but we would encourage the deacons to step
        up here. Consider appointing a “deacon of member care”
        who focuses on the physical needs of especially needy mem-
        bers such as elderly shut-ins.

167 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
7. CHURCH LEADERSHIP


    3. It’s September and the church’s budget needs to be passed
       before December 31st. Who leads? Finances sound like a
       deacon matter, right? In part. A budget is one picture of a
       church’s vision. Show me the money and I’ll show you the
       heart of the church. Therefore, elders should take the lead
       and give direction. That doesn’t mean the deacons cannot
       help by submitting estimates and listing needs for their
       areas of service. And a deacon of budget can pull the entire
       spreadsheet together and propose a budget for the elders to
       begin working with. But the elders should apportion and
       balance the budget, weighing, for example, local needs (such
       as buildings and salaries) against international missions. I
       would recommend that the elders present the budget to the
       church with the support of the deacons.

TWO CLARIFYING SUGGESTIONS
How should elders and deacons decide which issues are or are not
primarily their responsibility? Here are two suggestions that should
help clarify matters:
     1. Elders should be careful to keep administrative (deacon)
         matters from dominating their agenda. The work of the
         elders can easily be overwhelmed by a church’s unending
         stream of seemingly urgent physical matters, yet this is
         not their main task. Consider forming an administrative
         sub-committee among the elders that can address more
         deacon-oriented concerns before they get to the elders. This
         can keep administrative concerns from clogging up the
         agenda of the elders as a whole. Give that sub-committee
         authority to act on behalf of the elders. On the flip side,
         elders can quickly take the legs out from under the deacons
         and thus discourage them by too much oversight. Instead,
         elders should delegate responsibilities to faithful servants
         and trust them to capably handle such matters.

168 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
How to Separate Deacon Work from Elder Work


     2. Elders should model good communication. How? First,
        they should seek counsel from the deacons before mak-
        ing certain decisions. Consider Proverbs 15:22: “Without
        counsel plans fail, but with many advisers they succeed.”
        Second, they should make sure the deacons are never caught
        off guard by any of the elders’ decisions. Therefore, keep
        the lines of communication open between the elders and
        the deacons. Consider planning one-on-one conversations
        between elders and deacons, as well as having a periodic
        gathering of both groups in which the elders inform dea-
        cons about decisions the elders have made before they put
        such matters before the whole church.

TWO ENCOURAGEMENTS FOR THE ROAD
AHEAD
Finally, here are two encouragements to elders and deacons to press
on in your work and labor for unity:
     1. Elders: Labor to build trust with the deacons. Don’t assume
          they trust you by the mere fact that you hold an office.
          Work overtime to communicate with deacons and carefully
          consider their counsel. As the deacons’ trust and confidence
          grows, you will defeat the evil one’s divisive ways.
     2. Deacons: Assume a posture of support without an attitude
          of “playing second fiddle.” According to 1 Corinthians 12:28
          the gift of “administrating” is right up there with apostles,
          prophets, miracles, and healing. If you have a gift for ad-
          ministration and the qualities of a deacon (1 Tim. 3:8–13)
          you are a gift to Christ’s church. You have been given a par-
          ticular “manifestation of the Spirit for the common good.”
          (1 Cor. 12:7) Use your gift to put down division and build
          up Christ’s body.

169 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
7. CHURCH LEADERSHIP


     In short, be aware of the overlapping areas of responsibility
that elders and deacons may have, and work to clarify which group
should handle different issues. Fight against turfiness. Communi-
cate openly and thoroughly with each other. In doing so, you will
fight off division and model godly unity among the leaders for all the
flock to see, profit from, and imitate.




170 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. Prayer

WHAT IS IT?
Many wrongly think of prayer as being a kind of mystical energy or
religious ritual. But prayer is simply talking to God. It can include
praising God, confessing sin, asking for needs, and even lamenting
the brokenness of the world. In the Bible, individual Christians and
churches are commanded to pray because God really listens and
responds to the prayers of his people.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• Jesus taught his disciples to pray directly to God as their Father,
  to praise him for who he is, and ask him to provide for all our
  needs (Matt. 6:6–9).
• He also said believers should ask boldly because God knows
  what we need and has committed himself to providing for us
  (Matt. 6:25–34).
• James identified the reason for believers not having what we need
  is because we do not ask ( Jas. 4:2–3).
• The early church regularly gathered to pray as they faced many
  challenges in advancing the gospel among the lost (Acts 1:14,
  4:23–31, 12:5).

WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Prayer is so fundamental to the Bible that the Bible cannot be under-
stood without it. This is because what God says demands a response
from us. Proper responses to God’s revelation include praising, ask-
ing, confessing, and lamenting to God in prayer.

171 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
    On the Use and Importance
       of Corporate Prayer
                         MARK DEVER




SIGNIFICANCE OF CORPORATE PRAYER
What’s the difference between individual prayer and corporate
prayer?
      In individual prayer, I am simply responding to God myself—my
own knowledge of him, my relationship with him, my experience with
him. In corporate prayer, when somebody opens their mouth to pray
for a whole group of people, then the person leading has to think not
just for themselves but they have to think,“What does this Bible study
group, or what does my family, or what does this local church need to
praise God for, thank him for, confess, and ask him for right now?”

In corporate prayer is the person praying speaking to God, to
people, or to both?
       To both. People don’t think about that sometimes. You know,
it’s like when somebody talks about someone else praying in a quiet
voice, and then the person who did the praying responds in a sort of
self-righteous way, “I wasn’t talking to you.” Well, actually, if you’re
praying out loud you are talking to them in part. You see this in
the prophets like Isaiah and Jeremiah. You’ll see that in the Psalms
too. Basically, if you’re opening your mouth and asking us to close
ours, then you are in part speaking to us. And you just have to take
account of that fact.

172 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
On the Use and Importance of Corporate Prayer


     So practically, if you’re the person leading that prayer, pray “we,”
not “I.” You may occasionally pray “I,” but generally you should pray
“we” because you’re representing yourself and all those other people
before the Lord.

Let me follow up on a point you were just making about seeing
corporate prayer exampled in Scripture. Since it’s based in Scrip-
ture, is corporate prayer something pastors should—normatively
should—be doing?
     Oh, yeah. It’s the example you see in Acts. Also, Paul exhorts
Timothy to do this in his correspondence with him. Yeah, definitely.

Is the church that fails to take corporate prayer seriously depriv-
ing its members of something?
      Yes, I think you deprive yourself and your members of one of
those key parts of what your identity is as Christians. Paul tells the
Corinthians that we have the same Spirit in us, and corporate prayer
is a wonderful acting-out of the ontological unity that we have spiri-
tually as we literally speak with one voice to God. To deny that, and
to instead view the church’s gathering as your quiet time with five
hundred other people is to miss out. It screens out the local church
from the reality experienced as a Christian. It’s an impoverishment.

So what are some of the benefits for the individual christian of
corporate prayer? Here I am; I’m a member of a congregation; I’m
sitting here participating in this corporate prayer—what are the
benefits for me? How will I grow in grace?
      Participating regularly in corporate prayer begins to take out
the individualistic assumption that Christianity is only about me and
my relationship with God; and it begins to re-situate us as individual
Christians in the congregation so that we become aware of this per-
son who’s sick, this person who’s just had a baby, this person who’s

173 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


unemployed, this person who’s just become a Christian. Participat-
ing in corporate prayer helps us discover that our lives as followers of
Christ are tied up with one another’s. It helps us discover how God
cares about the congregation as an entity—that it should be marked
by the fruit of the Spirit and the love of John 13:34–35.
     That’s not how Christians in America normally talk. You hear
about “my own spiritual desires and demands;” you don’t really hear
about the local congregation’s desires and demands. But regularly
participating in corporate prayer reintroduces these ideas and reori-
ents our thinking.

So it works against disunity.
     Yes, among many other things. It works against disunity be-
cause you begin to realize that that person that you are disregarding,
mocking, or dismissing is actually part of your own body. You have
to approach them and their problems—even when you disagree
with them—differently than you would before.

Including owning their. . .
      Yes, it’s not “their problem,” it’s “our problem.” This pulls you
into church discipline. It pulls you into correcting other people. It
pulls you into other aspects of life together because you tangle your
life up with theirs.

To what extent are you conscious of pastoring the people as
you pray?
     I am really aware of that when I’m preparing a prayer. I won’t
write out a manuscript, but I’ll make notes of what I want to pray
for and while I’m doing this I will think along these lines. When I’m
actually praying, though, I am really aware of being in the presence
of God, and I’m only secondarily thinking about the people.

174 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
On the Use and Importance of Corporate Prayer


Are you saying that you’re more aware of being in God’s
presence when you lead in corporate pray than when you
pray individually?
     Oh, yeah! I’m highly aware of—you know—“Lord, here we are
in your presence at CHBC, and here’s what we would like to talk to
you about.” Yes, I feel very conspicuous.

More than when you preach?
     Similarly or more. Certainly not less. I mean, I feel like I’ve
walked up to the Chief Shepherd, and I’m his little undershepherd.
And I’ve got all these sheep, and I’m trying to get them to, sh-h-h-h,
pay attention now, you know, I kind of feel like that. I hope I’m not
now ruining your experience of the pastoral prayers here at CHBC
with distracting images.

Oh, not at all. . . What are you trying to teach people
through your corporate prayer about their individual
prayer lives? What would you want them to replicate?
     I got a great letter once from a member who was a new Christian,
saying that she had learned how to pray in her own personal devo-
tional life from being in the services at CHBC. In fact, she had even
learned how to pray in public by listening to the different prayers that
were prayed. So I would hope that we would model different aspects
of our relationship with God by the prayers that we have in public.

SUNDAY MORNING GATHERING
So, getting practical, you have two different services—the Sun-
day morning and the Sunday evening service. Let’s start with
Sunday morning. What do you do on Sunday mornings?
      We certainly think that different churches have freedom to do
it different ways. But at Capitol Hill Baptist, we will always have a
prayer of praise (which is focused on some aspect of God), a prayer

175 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


of confession (where we confess our sins), a prayer of intercession/
pastoral prayer (where we pray through various concerns that we
have as a church family), and a brief prayer of thanks. There will
also be a prayer after the sermon in which we try to pray certain
truths into our hearts; and there will sometimes be a brief prayer of
invitation for God’s presence at the beginning of our service.

You mentioned prayers of praise, confession, intercession, and
thanks, which is basically what we see listed in the bulletin
every week. But the Psalms have more than just these four
categories. There are also prayers of lament, remembrance, and
more. Would you ever do a prayer of lament? Why do you camp
on those four?
     Some of the things that the Psalms illustrates for us are con-
tained in individual prayers. So they’re not all prayers that will be
normal in the corporate worship. Having said that, a prayer of la-
ment certainly can be appropriate publicly and corporately, and I
think we certainly would have elements of that.

Prayers of remembrance?
     Yes, and that happens in the prayer of praise often. But back to
the prayer of lament—I think that in my own pastoral prayers, at
the end, sometimes I’ll reflect on what we Christians are and how
our culture understands us, and I’ll lament that.

Any further comments on what you want accomplished in the
prayer of praise?
     We try to distinguish it from just a prayer of thanks. The prayer
of thanks is me thanking God for something that he’s given me. A
prayer of praise is a prayer acknowledging an aspect of God’s char-
acter that’s been revealed to us. So we might praise him that he is
a saving God; whereas we might thank him for his salvation of us.

176 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
On the Use and Importance of Corporate Prayer


We would praise him that he is a revealing God—that he, in and of
himself wants to make himself known—whereas we might thank
him for giving us the gift of his Word and his Spirit—things like
that. So I think it’s good to help us to think of God as the Bible
reveals him to us even before we meditate on what he’s done for us.

So for the few theological nitpickers out there who I’ve heard try
to demolish the distinction between thanks and praise by saying,
“We only know him through his economy of redemption,” you’re
still going to say . . .
      That he has revealed more about himself than merely the
economy of redemption.

What’s being accomplished in the prayer of confession?
     We certainly can’t confess every sin that we’ve committed. But
we mean to lead the congregation in thinking about their lives be-
fore the Lord, especially in light of whatever text the church will be
studying that particular morning. So it’s meant to encourage self-
examination and to help us meditate on God’s holiness and how that
matches with the lives we’ve been leading. Then at the end, with the
entire bill being totaled up, as it were, we ask for his forgiveness in
the name of Christ.

Which you then conclude with. . .
      Well, after the prayer for forgiveness for our sins, we read an
assurance of pardon from Scripture. We don’t do that as priests say-
ing, “I absolve you.” But we do quote from God’s Word on how God
gives us forgiveness through Christ. There are many great verses
which assure the saints and instruct others.

Seven or eight years ago, I remember you said that you didn’t do
a prayer of confession every week because you were concerned

177 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


about causing visiting or former catholics to stumble, whereas
now the practice is to do one every week. Why the change?
      I just got to thinking about it and decided the damage of not do-
ing a weekly prayer of confession was greater than the risk of doing one.

Gotcha.
     Yeah, and we might change it back at some point. I don’t know.
But I think it seems like a good, healthy part of church life.

Will you walk me through your pastoral prayer? You seem to
take an extended time on that. What do you do and why do you
do it?
     Let me start with the “why.” I think the pastoral prayer is impor-
tant for showing ourselves and others that the church is not doing
what we appear to be doing, but that all this is God’s work. Ulti-
mately, everything that we do is dependent upon God and his grace,
his mercy, his action. So I think the time given to intercession is a
proper, appropriate, worshipful, thankful expression of dependency,
and it’s a good and right thing for Christians to do.

It’s a form of praise.
      It is. It’s another form of praise as we confess our neediness.
And we confess it out loud and publicly because we’re confident of
his sufficiency and of his good will toward us in Christ.

You often state that at the beginning of your prayers.
      I’ll sometimes say something like that. Other times I’ll begin
with a statement from a prayer of Daniel’s in Daniel 9 where Daniel
calls on God to act and to answer for the sake of his name.
      I’ll begin my requests by asking the Lord to intervene in situa-
tions that will be strikingly on the mind of the congregation if some

178 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
On the Use and Importance of Corporate Prayer


member has recently been married or died or if there’s a situation
that the whole congregation’s aware of.
      Then I’ll pray for other classes of people: maybe the unem-
ployed, maybe those longing to have children, something like that.
Sometimes I’ll pray for members by name.
      And then I’ll pray for those in authority over us, and I’ll pray
for two or three things about our city or nation that are at stake.
I often pray for the schools. I think the public schools are a very
important part of the future in this country. Part of what praying for
our authorities means very practically is praying for those who have
authority in the public schools.
      Then I will pray for those who have gone out from us to preach
the gospel, which for us means missionaries, seminarians, and
pastors.
      I’ll also pray for at least one other church by name and its pas-
tor. Sometimes it’ll be another Baptist church, but more often than
not it will be a church of another denomination. Usually it will be a
church in our own area, but sometimes I pray for specific churches
or ministries outside of this area.
      Then I will pray for a number of different countries. Sometimes
I’ll pray for their governments, sometimes for religious freedoms,
certainly for the spread of the gospel.
      I try occasionally to thank God because he has done so much
to answer our prayers. It seems appropriate to remember that when
publicly praying, lest we make it look like we’re beggars because he
doesn’t greatly give to us, when he does. I know we’ve already had the
prayer of praise and we’ll have a prayer of thanks, but I just want to
thank him a little bit here too.
      Finally, I will pray for Christians to be marked by certain char-
acteristics, including our own congregation. And here I’ll usually

179 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


pray through the points of the sermon for us as a congregation. I
pray that God would help us to hear, understand, and change.

How can a pastor get from a place where the Sunday morning
gathering has one or two undefined prayers to having these three
or four defined prayers every Sunday morning?
      He should just start planning it into the service. He can teach on
it in his sermons, as he has opportunity to mention prayer; quickly
explain why he’s doing these different things. Part of what prevents
pastors from doing this, though, is the larger issue of thinking of the
service like they’re on TV time—no wasted time, no wasted space.
So teach them, “Look, we’re not about that. It doesn’t matter if we
get done at 12:00 or not.”

OTHER NUTS AND BOLTS
How long are your pastoral prayers?
   I don’t know. My guess is five to twelve minutes.

How long are the other prayers—the prayer of praise and of
confession?
    The prayer of praise, I’d guess, is like four to seven minutes. The
confession is a little shorter, like four to six minutes maybe.

A few moments ago, you said you make notes. Do you encour-
age guys to write out their prayers, or is spontaneity the better
way to go?
      There are advantages to both. What you want is sincerity, but
you also want it to be well thought through. If you’re able to think
on your feet well and not distract your people but lead them to the
Lord, that’s great. But if you get tongue-tied and repeat yourself a
lot, then I don’t care if you’re sincere to the point of crying, that’s not
best—generally—for leading public prayer.

180 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
On the Use and Importance of Corporate Prayer


So you don’t have a problem with people writing out prayers?
     No, it’s fine. Now, if they read their prayers in a way that’s distract-
ing because it sounds like they’re reading an essay, that’s a problem.
     Once we had a staff member who quoted Luther to the Lord,
and told the Lord that he was quoting Luther: “Oh, Lord, as Luther
once said. . .” We told him later, “You don’t ever need to tell the Lord
who said something again.”
     So if the person praying doesn’t come across as if they’re read-
ing an essay to God but that they genuinely perceive themselves to
be praying, then I think that it’s fine to have notes or a manuscript.

Earlier you said that when leading corporate prayer, we should
pray “we” instead of “I.” Any other practical tips for leading the
congregation in corporate prayer?
     Speak up, speak clearly. If you can’t speak loudly and clearly,
you’re just frustrating the old people, and that’s not kind.
     Don’t say heretical things.
     Try to teach some godly friends in the congregation that it’s a
good thing for them to give you feedback—not to judge your rela-
tionship with God, but to help you better represent the Lord and
teach people by your public prayers. It’s appropriate for you to be
humble enough to hear feedback from them.

SUNDAY EVENING PRAYER MEETING
Moving to the Sunday evening prayer service, how are your goals
different for the evening service than the morning service as a
time of corporate prayer?
      People share various things, and I’ll call on various folk to lead
us in prayer for those things. So you hear more of a living body since
it’s not just the service leaders praying in monologue; it’s a bunch of
people praying.

181 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


Unlike many prayer services I’ve attended, people don’t raise their
hands and say, “Will you pray for this?” Instead, people come to
you beforehand. I know it hasn’t always been that way. How did
you make that transition?
     At first, our church had a normal Wednesday night prayer
meeting where one old deacon prayed for all the sick people in the
hospital, and then people put up hands and asked for unspoken
concerns. So I tried to get them to move from praying about their
uncle’s cancer to their own cancer; and then from praying for their
own cancer to their own spiritual life; and then from praying about
their own spiritual life to their evangelism; and then from their evan-
gelism to the church’s evangelism. My goal has been to move their
prayer to the more personal and spiritual, as well as to the corporate.

How did you do that?
   I would tell people “no” when they wanted to pray for a sick baby.

Right, okay. Anything else?
      I would say, “I’ll pray. Thank you for telling me. Let me encour-
age you to get your small group to pray or your friends.” When they
say, “Can I share tonight?” I’ll say, “Um, no,” and then I’d try to ex-
plain what I’m trying to do. It’s the one time the church has to get
together and pray about things that affect us as a church, so . . .

How did you transition from people raising their hands, “Pastor,
will you pray . . . ?” To everybody understanding that they needed
to come to you beforehand?
     Well, they just saw that that’s what happened. I think that
everybody came to understand it pretty easily. And they appreci-
ate it because they benefit from the work you as the pastor do of
brush clearing. You’re not going to have one guy talk for seventeen
minutes about a situation nobody understands, leaving everyone else

182 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
On the Use and Importance of Corporate Prayer


struggling in their carnal flesh wishing they could get out of there.
People appreciate your work of making sure beforehand that that
doesn’t happen.

Somebody comes to you with something heavy on their heart—
it’s a neighbor or someone they love who has cancer. Any tips on
how to pastorally respond with a “no”?
      You pray with them right then. Encourage them in prayer. And
ask them questions about their relationship with that person.




183 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                    Corporate Prayer1
                               JAMIE DUNLOP




I. INTRODUCTION
You have walked into a class on prayer this morning. That’s probably
not too surprising if you’ve been around churches for long—you’ve
probably had a number of classes on prayer over the years. But let me
explain what’s going to be different about this class. We’re going to
be looking at the role that corporate prayer has to play in our life as a
church. Not your life individually. Individual prayer is crucial—but
that’s not the topic of this class. Our prayer together as a church is
the topic here.
      Those of you who have been attending this Sunday School
know that the goal of our time together is to understand what we
can do as church members to foster the love and unity in our local
church that uniquely and compellingly demonstrates the power of
the gospel. Think of Jesus’s words in John 13:35: “By this all men will
know that you are my disciples, if you love one another.” Given how
central prayer is to our lives as Christians, it makes sense that prayer
is a vital part of building unity in our church.

Why Prayer Is Important
Generally speaking, why is prayer so important? Prayer is how
God’s people respond to him in thankfulness and praise. Prayer is

1 Editor’s Note: This article is a lightly adapted version of a core seminar manuscript origi-
   nally presented at Capital Hill Baptist Church.


184 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


how God’s people cry out to him for mercy and deliverance. Prayer
is how God’s people call upon him to accomplish the work of his
kingdom. In short, prayer is how we actively demonstrate our utter
dependence on him. It honors him as the source of all blessing.
     God calls his saints to be active in the work of the kingdom,
whether through preaching, evangelism, and so forth (1 Cor. 3:9).
But as we lean on him through prayer, we are reminded that the
salvation of individuals and the growth in his churches ultimately
comes from him, not from us. When his kingdom is advanced
through prayer, he gets the glory because it’s eminently clear that
he’s behind it all. (Indeed, it reminds us that even our activities of
preaching, evangelizing, and praying are the result of his work.)

A Few Biblical Examples of Prayer
As early as Genesis chapter 4, “men began to call upon the name of
the Lord” (v. 26). They realized their dreadful separation from God
through their sin after the fall.
     In Elijah’s great contest with the prophets of Baal, he called
upon the name of the Lord, and the prophets called on the name of
Baal (1 Kings 18). Elijah prayed:

      Oh Lord, God of Abraham, Issac and Israel, let it be known today that you
      are God in Israel and that I am your servant and have done all of these
      things at your command. Answer me, O Lord, answer me, so these people
      will know that you, O Lord, are God, and that you are turning their hearts
      back again. (1 Kgs. 18:36–37).
         The Lord answered Elijah by bringing down fire upon the offering. So
      God was glorified because it was evidently clear that he was the one true
      God, not Baal.


185 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


      In Psalm 50:15 God says: “Call upon me in the day of trouble;
I will deliver you, and you shall glorify me.”
      In the New Testament, God’s people are still commanded to
call out to God, but Christ taught that we should pray to the Father
in his name. In John 14:13, Jesus says, “And I will do whatever you
ask in my name so that the Son may bring glory to the Father.”
      These examples illustrate how God uses prayer to make it very
clear that he is the one who blesses. Therefore he gets the glory.

Raising the Question
But I wonder if you’ve considered just how important it is to pray
together with other Christians. In today’s individualistic culture,
not much emphasis is placed on corporate prayer. But as we’ll see,
the Bible attaches great significance to God’s people coming to-
gether to pray.
     For the rest of our time together, we’ll begin by thinking about
why God has called us to pray together as a church. We’ll then
consider how corporate prayer contributes to unity, and how we,
as members of this church, can contribute to this unity by actively
involving ourselves in the prayer life of the church.
     My hope is that through the material we cover, we will have
a better understanding of the importance of corporate prayer, and
that we will be thinking in a more focused way about seeking op-
portunities to pray with other members of the church.

II. WHY IS CORPORATE PRAYER IMPORTANT?
Let’s begin by considering the importance of Christians praying to-
gether in the church. I would hazard a guess that the first thing that
comes into most of our minds when someone mentions prayer is
our own personal prayer times with the Lord rather than corporate

186 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


prayer. Private prayer is certainly very important. We know this
from Jesus’s teaching in the Gospel of Matthew where he says:

      But when you pray, go into your room, close the door and pray to your Fa-
      ther, who is unseen. Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will
      reward you. (Matt. 6:6).


     Clearly, Christians are commanded to pray privately, even
secretly.
     But the Bible also very clearly calls upon Christians to pray
together. Indeed, in Matthew 6, verse 9, just three verses after the
verse I just read to you, Jesus instructs his disciples on how to pray
by setting forth what we know as the Lord’s Prayer.
     Beginning in verse 9, Jesus says,

      This then is how you should pray: Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your
      name, your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
      Give us today our daily bread. Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our
      debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.


      Did you notice all the plurals—“our,” “us,” “we”? In providing a
model prayer for his disciples, Jesus puts it in a form that commends
it for corporate use. The prayer naturally lends itself to group prayer
because of its using “our” instead of “my.” Even praying the Lord’s
prayer privately—which is fine to do—will remind you that you are
praying as part of a family of other believers. The Lord’s Prayer is an
invitation not only to pray but to pray together with other believers.
      So why is corporate prayer—praying together with other be-
lievers—so important?

187 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


1. It Advances God’s Kingdom in Face of Opposition
First, corporate prayer is important because God uses prayer to-
gether to advance his kingdom in the face of opposition.
      The early church had a number of obstacles to overcome, includ-
ing persecution. In spite of persecution, it continued to expand. How?
      If you have your Bibles, turn to Acts chapter 2 where we learn
that the early church gathered regularly for prayer. In verses 42 to
44, Luke writes,

      They devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and to fellowship, to the
      breaking of bread and to prayer. Everyone was filled with awe, and many
      wonders and miraculous signs were done by the apostles. All the believers
      were together and had everything in common.


     As a result—verse 47—“the Lord added to their number daily
those who were being saved.” Yet this growth often occurred in the
face of persecution, which we see several times. In Acts 4, Peter and
John are released from prison and the church gathers to hear their
report. Then they prayed together, praising God for his sovereignty
and asking for boldness in the face of the threats. Luke then tells us:

      After they had prayed, the place where they were meeting was shaken. And
      they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God boldly.
      (Acts 4:31)


     The result was that the gospel spread even more.
     Another example occurs in Acts 12. When King Herod (Agrip-
pa I) arrests Peter in order to please the Jews, the church gathers
together and “was earnestly praying to God for him” (Acts 12:5).
The night before Herod was to put Peter on trial, Peter was miracu-
lously delivered from imprisonment (Acts 12:5–11).

188 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


      So we see the power of united prayer in the early church. That
power comes from the Holy Spirit, who seemed to be especially ac-
tive in their corporate prayer. But the Holy Spirit didn’t stop working
with the early church. Throughout history we’ve seen God’s work to
be particularly active when his people have faithfully prayed together.
      The power of the Spirit in the early church and throughout
history should embolden us to pray together regularly for the ex-
pansion of the gospel in our country and around the world. God’s
work will not be thwarted! And following the example of the early
church, we’re to call upon him to continue in that work. That’s why
our church consistently prays for the work of other churches both
in the morning and evening services. That’s why our church prays
for religious freedom in countries where Christians are being perse-
cuted. But it’s also why our church desires to see the church expand
in the very face of persecution—that God’s power and wisdom will
be displayed as his church expands—inexplicably (by human wis-
dom)!—when all the forces of hell are arrayed against it.

2. It Imparts Wisdom and Guidance
Second, God imparts wisdom and guidance to churches as his
people gather together in prayer seeking such wisdom.
      Corporate prayer was important for the early church as they
sought God’s wisdom for the internal affairs of the church, such as
choosing its leaders. We know from James that God generously gives
wisdom to those who ask him for it. So, early in Acts, the church
prays together for wisdom when selecting a replacement for Judas
among the disciples. They prayed, “Lord, you know everyone’s heart.
Show us which of these two you have chosen to take over this apos-
tolic ministry . . .” (Acts 1:24–25). And through the casting of lots,
God gave them the name of Matthias. Thus prayer is a means that
God has given his church through which he guides the church.

189 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


3. Our Dependence Glorifies God
Third, God is glorified through our dependence on him in united
prayer.
     Earlier we talked about how prayer magnifies God by showing
our dependence upon him. That dependence is particularly striking
when God’s people gather together to praise his name, confess their
sins, and make their requests known to him. Why? Because such
prayer clearly displays our dependence on God to a watching world;
it expresses audibly our needs in a powerful way.
     In corporate prayer we show our utter dependence to God as
a church.

4. Our Unity Glorifies God
Fourth, God is glorified through the unity of our prayer.
     Unity among God’s people glorifies God. That’s why Paul
calls on the entire church in Ephesians 4 to keep the unity of the
Spirit through the bond of peace. Praying together is one way
that we satisfy this command—it visibly unites us together as
God’s people.
     But there’s also a special unity through corporate prayer aside
from the unity displayed in the physical gathering. When Holy-
Spirit-indwelt Christians come together to pray, there is a unique
kind of unity and power in the Spirit. Not only do we commune
with God, we can trust that a special communion occurs with each
other as the Spirit works in us simultaneously and gives a common
faith and heart for God’s will.
     Two things to take away from this section: (i) we grow spiri-
tually as we hear others commit to prayer; (ii) we offer a powerful
witness to non-Christians who see the love and commitment that
we have for one another in our prayers.

190 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


III. HOW DOES CORPORATE PRAYER
PROMOTE UNITY?
That’s the “why” of corporate prayer. Now, let’s get to the “how.” How
does corporate prayer promote unity in our church—and what can
we do as church members to further that end? Let me walk you
through three ways that corporate prayer promotes unity.

1. Corporate Prayer Draws Us Together
Perhaps the most obvious answer is that praying together has a
natural tendency to draw people closer.
     When we pray together, we are leaving behind our own selfish
desires and focusing on God and others. So, for example, on Sun-
day evenings, our church prays for each other in various ways: we
thank God for his grace in people’s lives; we ask him to heal the
sick; we thank him for the good things he has given, like children
and marriages; we ask him to bless various ministry and evangelistic
opportunities; we ask him to comfort the hurting; and so forth. Both
praying for others, and hearing others pray for us, naturally draws us
closer together as we learn more about each other and as we feel the
effect of those prayers in the work accomplished by the Holy Spirit.
Sometimes you’ll hear the pastors describe the evening service as
our family time. Praying together draws us together as a family.
     How then can we be good stewards of this gift of united prayer?
One way is to pursue opportunities to pray with others. For example,
have a time of prayer in your small groups (which I trust many of the
groups already have). Pray before studying the Scriptures, and then
pray for each other so that unity is fostered. And when you pray in
small groups, don’t just have one person pray but have everyone pray.
For example, you can have each person pray for the person on their
right or left.

191 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


      Other opportunities include praying as a family, praying before
meals with friends, praying with missionaries, praying with co-
workers or friends we see during the week. And you can probably
think of many more ways.
      One more opportunity to consider is whether there are prayer
requests you could share with the congregation that could draw us
together and help us as a body to marvel at the power and mercy of
God. Think of corporate prayer for you as a service to this congrega-
tion. For some of us, that might feel a bit strange. We’re fairly private
people who think of asking others to pray for us as placing a burden
on them. But that’s not how the Bible views things. There’s a great
passage in 2 Corinthians 1 where Paul is sharing about a particularly
difficult situation.

      We do not want you to be uninformed, brothers, about the hardships we
      suffered in the province of Asia. We were under great pressure, far beyond
      our ability to endure, so that we despaired even of life. Indeed, in our hearts
      we felt the sentence of death. But this happened that we might not rely on
      ourselves but on God, who raises the dead. He has delivered us from such
      a deadly peril, and he will deliver us. On him we have set our hope that he
      will continue to deliver us, as you help us by your prayers. Then many will
      give thanks on our behalf for the gracious favor granted us in answer to the
      prayers of many. (2 Cor. 1:8–11).


     That last verse is right on point: “Then many will give thanks on
our behalf for the gracious favor granted us in answer to the prayers
of many.” Was it a burden on these believers to pray for Paul? Ab-
solutely not. It was a tremendous blessing to lift him up and share
in the joy of God’s continual deliverance of him. What if Paul had
decided that his problems weren’t worth bothering the church? We
should thank God that he did not.

192 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


      So think about how you can share your needs with others so
that we may be drawn together as believers and encouraged by God’s
amazing work. Are you struggling in your faith? Are you struggling
at work? Are you struggling in your marriage? Are you struggling
with evangelism? I remember when a brother in this church shared
on Sunday night that he was struggling with his belief in God. His
openness was a good example for us. As the church rallied around
him in prayer, we were all able to praise God as our prayers were
answered. Allow others to bring you before our Lord in prayer—it
is a privilege for them.

2. Corporate Prayer Fosters a God-Centered Mindset
A second way corporate prayer builds unity in the church is that it
makes us more like-minded theologically as scriptural truths—such
as God’s glory and sovereignty—are applied to various situations
and circumstances.
     God through his Word shapes and molds our minds to know
his truths. Prayer gives us an opportunity to apply these truths
to specific prayer situations. As God-centered prayers are vocally
shared among Christians, they bring greater unity by growing this
God-centered mindset among those in attendance.
     I think the clearest example of this in our church life occurs
in our Sunday evening times. I’ve been very encouraged in listen-
ing to the prayers during that service—not because of how eloquent
they may or may not be; not because of their level of sophistica-
tion or simplicity; but because they increasingly reflect the truths
of Scripture.
     The Sunday evening prayer time has helped me to pray more
biblically, and therefore caused me to be more like-minded with oth-
ers. Here are some examples of common scriptural themes that I
continuously hear on Sunday nights:

193 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


     • a desire to see God glorified whatever the circumstance;
     • a recognition of God’s sovereignty;
     • praise for God’s grace and mercy in Christ;
     • praise for God’s grace in others’ lives;
     • a desire for the gospel to be proclaimed among all peoples;
     • and a recognition of our sin and hopelessness apart from
        Christ.
     So in prayer, we unite around the truths of God.
     The pastors and elders also try to foster this God-centered
mindset through the various prayers in our Sunday morning ser-
vice: the prayer of praise, prayer of confession, prayer of petition,
and prayer of thanks. In these prayers, we seek to communicate the
gospel by focusing on how God is worthy of all praise for who he is
and what he has done, and how we are sinful, needy people in need
of a Savior. Also, you may have noticed that often the themes in
these prayers reflect the themes in the morning’s text of Scripture.
     While we’re on this topic, let me address one issue that you
might wonder about. Sometimes people observe that many of the
men who lead our church in prayer on Sunday mornings have written
out their prayers. That may strike you as a bit strange, maybe even
inappropriate. After all, aren’t our prayers supposed to be genuine—
from the heart? And doesn’t reading prayers lend itself to unhealthy
motivations—seeking the adoration of men rather than God?
     Concerning a prayer’s genuineness, I don’t think there’s any
reason to say that something that is spontaneous is somehow more
genuine than something that’s been carefully reflected upon and
considered. Concerning an individual’s motivation, well, the concern
is certainly correct. Whether we are reading a prayer or praying
spontaneously, we should pray to bring glory to God and not to
ourselves. In other words, I’m not sure we can say that someone who

194 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


prays spontaneously is any less susceptible to wrong motivations as
someone who writes out his prayers beforehand.
      The important thing to remember here is, the person leading
corporate prayer is responsible for leading the prayer in a way that
teaches and edifies the whole congregation. Thus, it’s often helpful to
spend time in advance thinking through how one can pray in a way
that edifies the congregation.
      Given that praying together fosters unity by making us more
like-minded as we hear God-centered prayers, how can we be good
stewards of our prayer time?
      Let me suggest several ways:
      #1—Pray the prayers of Scripture. The Bible presents us
with actual examples of prayers that we can pray. Think of the
Psalms. Think of Daniel 9. Think of the Lord’s Prayer. Think of
all of Paul’s wonderful prayers, as you’ll often find at the beginning
of his letters (for example Eph. 1:15–19; 3:14–19; Phil. 1:3–6;
Col. 1:9–14; 1 Thes. 2:3-4; let me also recommend to you a book:
A Call to Spiritual Reformation by D.A. Carson, which looks spe-
cifically at the prayers of Paul.)
      # 2—Pray the commands of Scripture. Think of the different
things Scripture commands God’s people to do, from the Ten Com-
mandments to Paul’s commands to put off the old man and put on
the new man. As you pray for God’s people, ask God to help them
fulfill what he requires of them.
      # 3—Pray the “ambitions” of Scripture. That may sound like
a strange way of putting it, but consider what Scripture is ambi-
tious about for the lives of God’s people. For example, praying for
someone who is ill involves praying that God would comfort and
heal the person, but it also means asking God to use that illness
for that person’s spiritual good and God’s glory. We know from

195 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


Scripture that God often uses trials in the lives of his people for
just these purposes. Another way of summarizing this point would
be to say, Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness in
your public prayers.
    #4—Pray the promises of Scripture. The Scriptures are filled
with promises for God’s people, and we’re told that all of God’s
promises are “yes” and “amen” in Christ (2 Cor. 1:20). There are
countless examples I could point to. Here’s one—Isaiah 41:10:
“Fear not, for I am with you; be not dismayed, for I am your God;
I will strengthen you, I will help you, I will uphold you with my
righteous right hand.” So are you in a time of trial or tragedy? Go
to the Lord and pray this promise back to him: “Lord, based on
the righteousness of your Son which you have mercifully granted
to me by faith, please, fulfill this promise: strengthen me; help
me; uphold me. Your Word promises that you will, and so I fall
entirely on this promise!”

3. Corporate Prayer Creates a Unity of Purpose
A third way that corporate prayer creates unity is by uniting Chris-
tians around the ministries of the church.
    If you attend our Sunday evening service, you will hear a num-
ber of announcements about the various ministries at our church,
which we then pray for. As the church listens and prays, we become
excited together about church plants in Central Asia and North-
ern Virginia, or about our outreach to other churches through the
Weekenders or the latest publications that Nine Marks is working
on. Thus, our unity is fostered in corporate prayer as we grow and
unite around a common vision of ministry.

196 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


IV. PRAYING INDIVIDUALLY FOR UNITY
IN THE CHURCH
We’ve been spending most of our time talking about the importance
of corporate prayer in our church. But, of course, private prayer is
also important in our church. There are many ways private prayer
can be used to build unity in our church. Let me draw your attention
briefly to four of them.

1. Pray for the Preacher and His Sermon
As we taught in previous weeks of this class, preaching is the most
important thing we do together as a church. Accordingly, we should
specifically pray for that time by praying for those preaching and
those listening to God’s Word.
     Over and over the apostle Paul pleads with the church body to
specifically lift him up in prayer. So he says to the Ephesians, “Pray
also for me, that whenever I open my mouth, words may be given
me that I will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel, for
which I am an ambassador in chains” (Eph. 6:19; also Col. 4:2–4).
     How specifically can we pray corporately for the preacher (in
addition of course to our individual prayers)? Two thoughts:
     First, use the time while the offering plate is passed—right
before the sermon—to pray for the sermon, for the preacher, for
your own heart, and for the hearts of others. Ask God to encourage
and strengthen the preacher to proclaim God’s word effectively and
powerfully. Pray that the Spirit would convict people of their sin,
turn hearts of stone into hearts of flesh, and grant people a desire for
God in all his goodness and glory.
     Second, use your small groups or family time during the week
to pray for Sunday’s preaching and the church’s times of teaching
generally. Just include that as a regular prayer item along with your
prayers for each other.

197 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
8. PRAYER


2. Pray Through the Church Directory
In addition to praying for the preacher and his sermon, we should
pray for the members of the church. One way to do this is to
pray regularly through the church directory, whether by yourself
or with others. Pray through the directory one page a day. Ask
people how you can pray for them as you have occasion. And then
let them know that you have prayed for them. This will encourage
others and promote unity.

3. Pray for the Church’s Various Ministries and Evangelistic
Outreaches
In addition to praying for the preaching and for members indi-
vidually, we should pray for the church’s outreach. Praying for our
various forms of outreach unites our hearts around common ambi-
tions. How can you do this? First, join us on Sunday nights. If you
are not used to attending church twice on Sundays, it may seem like
a bit of a challenge at first, but this is a wonderful time where the
family gathers together and prays. This is when we hear about many
of the church’s outreaches, evangelistic and otherwise. Second, take
notes and then pray on your own through the week for the church’s
work outside its walls.

4. Pray for Problems in Our Church
Lastly, use your individual prayer time to lift up to God difficulties in
our church. When you see something that bothers you—anything
from someone struggling with anger to concerns about the build-
ing—then pray. You might decide to do other things as well, like
address the matter to an elder. We’re always happy to talk about
these things with you. But always start by praying hard for us as a
church. Don’t just sit back and ignore a problem or complain about

198 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
Corporate Prayer


it. Pray. Ask God to give you a right heart, but also to preserve his
church and to transform us more clearly into his image.

V. CONCLUSION
To conclude, we’ve looked at the importance of prayer in the church
and how it promotes unity. We’ve also considered various ways that
we, as members of this church, can foster unity through praying with
others. I hope this article has encouraged you to strategize on how
you can be good stewards of corporate prayer time, whether that’s in
our Sunday services, small groups, family devotionals, Angel Tree
prayer meetings, morning prayer times, discipling relationships, or
just impromptu prayer with others.




199 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. Missions

WHAT IS IT?
Missions is church planting across significant barriers. To fill out
that just a bit, missions involves churches sending qualified workers
across linguistic, geographic, or cultural barriers to start or strength-
en churches, especially in places where Christ has not been named.

WHERE IS IT IN THE BIBLE?
• The entire Bible tells the story of God making a people for himself
  out of those who had been cast into darkness and death by Adam’s
  sin and their own. He accomplished his people’s redemption
  through Jesus’s Christ, the one who the Old Testament anticipates
  and the New Testament celebrates. This means that the entire
  Bible is rightly said to be about missions—God’s mission to save.
• In the Great Commission, Jesus bound churches everywhere to
  the task of disciple-making (Matt. 28:19–20). We know that
  local churches are the means for fulfilling Jesus’s commission be-
  cause (i) the apostles planted local churches wherever they went
  throughout the book of Acts; and (ii) Jesus commands new be-
  lievers to be baptized—an ordinance normally given to churches
  rather than to individuals.
• The book of Acts is all about the planting of and strengthening
  churches in order to advance the gospel. The individual letters of
  the New Testament also serve this end.
• Revelation 7:9 guarantees that God’s mission, which he is
  currently working through his church, will succeed. A “great
  multitude” from every nation will gather to him on the last day.

200 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
Missions is important because God’s primary objective in creating
the world has always been to redeem a people through Christ for his
glory (Col. 1:16–22). God calls churches to join him in this mission.




201 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
         A Plea for Gospel Sanity
               in Missions1
                          AUBREY SEQUEIRA




PART I: OBSESSED WITH NUMBERS
I feel like I’ve had the conversation more than a thousand times. In
my years living in the United States, believers often meet me and,
having learned that I’m from India, they ask: “Oh! Have you heard
of the Indian minister _____? ”
      “No, I haven’t. How do you know him?”
      “Well, our church supports him—he’s an amazing evangelist
who has planted churches in the last five years, has opened five or-
phanages, and runs a Bible College to train pastors!”
      “Really? Do you know him personally?”
      In most cases the reply is, “Sure, we’ve met him. He visited our
church and shared his testimony. He has such an amazing testimony.
His vision is to plant more than 30,000 churches in the next ten years.”
      It’s been hard for me not to grow cynical and feel frustrated
each time I have conversations like these. Because what my Western
brothers and sisters often don’t understand is that most Indian “min-
istries” have learned what excites people in the West. Indians have
learned that massive numbers and astounding testimonies dazzle
the Western church—and when supporting partners in the West

1 Editor’s note: This article originally appeared on the Training Leaders International
   website.


202 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


are impressed, that typically means the dollars rush in. Unfortu-
nately, Western churches seldom, if ever, learn that in many cases the
numbers are inflated, the testimonies are fabricated, and the “gospel
work” they’ve been investing in is actually a mirage.
      The conversation I’ve described above illustrates some particu-
lar issues in missions that I’ve watched with growing concern, and as
an Indian, who was born and raised in India and came to the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ through the faithful labors of a Western
missionary in my city, I feel responsible to voice my concerns.
      In turn, I hope to address some of the major problems in mis-
sions in India—problems that arise from certain emphases in the
West. These problems are perpetuated and exacerbated both by
Western missionaries who go to India, and Western churches who
support indigenous Indian ministries. My desire is not to be pes-
simistic and critical, but to call us all to be faithful and obedient to
the biblical commands to “make disciples” and proclaim the “whole
counsel of God.” Consider this a plea from East to West for gospel-
centered sanity in missions.

I. Obsessed with Numbers
First, it’s important to discuss one of the primary problems in mis-
sions in India—the Western drive for numerical efficiency, that is,
the idea that large numbers are a validation of God’s blessing and
ministry success.
      The corporate world is infatuated with numbers. Big numbers.
Numbers are the order of the day in every sphere of life, and the
drive for impressive numbers has found its way into the church and
the church’s mission, both in the West, and—as a result of Western
influence—in India. Most missions buzzwords are in some way col-
ored by the notion of numerical efficiency: “rapid,” “multiplication,”
“strategy,” “growth.”

203 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


      Every “vision” and every “report” has some kind of a numerical
tag attached to it. 5000 churches in five years. 30,000 baptisms in
three years. Bigger and faster = better. Right?
      Wrong!
      Sadly, the Western church’s obsession with numbers has had a
destructive effect so that the name of Christ is blasphemed in India.
      A sinful craze for bigger and better numbers has tainted both
indigenous ministries and the work of Western missionaries in India.
The notion that numerical growth is an indicator of faithfulness is
foreign to the Scriptures and actually arises from the “church-growth
movement.” My goal here is not primarily to advance a biblical and
theological argument against the church-growth movement or against
the more contemporary pragmatic proponents of “church-planting
movement” (CPM) strategies. Rather, my aim here is primarily to
point out the bad fruit of such methodologies in India. For an inci-
sive and penetrating critique of CPM methodologies see the excellent
articles by Jackson Wu: “There Are No Church Planting Movements
in the Bible: Why Biblical Exegesis Missiological Methods Cannot
Be Separated”2 and “The Influence of Culture On the Evolution of
Mission Methods: Using ‘Church Planting Movements’ As A Case
Study.”3 But sadly, most churches—even those that hold to a more
robust God-centered theology of the gospel—have bought into this
false idea that “rapid growth” is the primary sign of God’s blessing. The
faster you grow, the more faithful you are.
      I hope to debunk this false idea by discussing some of the disas-
trous effects that it’s had on missions in India. But more than that,

2   Jackson Wu, “A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions: From East to West (Part 1),” Global
     Missiology (Spring 2015), http://ojs.globalmissiology.org/index.php/english/
     article/view/1711.
3   Jackson Wu, “A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions: From East to West (Part 2),” Global
     Missiology (Spring 2015), http://ojs.globalmissiology.org/index.php/english/
     article/view/1712.


204 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


I hope to rouse my Western brothers and sisters to a more sane,
faithful, and gospel-centered approach to missions. We may cer-
tainly celebrate numerical growth if it accords with the Scriptures.
But when numerical growth replaces Scriptural priorities, the gospel
is compromised and Christian witness is tarnished. By pointing out
some of the devastating results of the emphasis on numbers, I hope
to encourage Western churches to be discerning in the missionary
works they support while also encouraging my Indian brothers to
seek true gospel growth in their ministries, regardless of whether
that looks impressive to the West or not.

The Scourge of Christian Nominalism
Missionary reports from India are filled with the news of amazing
“people-movements” to Christ that are apparently taking place all
over the country. Missionaries I’ve talked to have described their
work in these terms: “7000 churches were planted in Kashmir in
the last five years.” “50,000 new believers were baptized in New
Delhi last year.” “Hundreds of thousands of low-caste ‘Dalits’ (un-
touchables) are coming to know Christ.” We are told that things are
happening in India on an “unprecedented scale,” matched only by
the opening chapters of the book of Acts. Is this for real? Let me
respond with three points.

     1. Where Are the Churches?
     A fellow Indian co-laborer in the gospel (who labors in one
of the hardest regions in North India) tells me that when he hears
Western friends talk about these thousands of churches planted,
without blinking, he wryly asks for their address and postal code, so
he can go visit at least one of them. His point is not that all churches
must have a physical address, but that these numbers are reporting
phantom churches that don’t exist in reality.

205 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


      In short, the numbers are a delusion. These so-called “churches”
are typically nothing more than a group of three or four people
made to gather together once or twice casually. They hear a couple
of watered-down Bible stories and vanish into oblivion after that.
      In most Western missions work in India, pragmatic priorities
have supplanted biblical ones. A Western missionary friend recently
told me that upon his deployment to India, superiors in his orga-
nization insisted on being “strategic” to “stimulate rapid growth” by
planting “rabbit-churches” that are quickly established and multiply
fast, rather than “elephant churches” that take a long time to estab-
lish and then require much labor in discipleship, which slows things
down. My friend’s forthright response: “But rabbit churches get
devoured by hawks and wolves.”
      The craze for numbers and the push for rapid growth results in
“churches” that have no gospel, no trained leadership, no theology,
and no depth—making them easy prey for the heresies of prosperity
theology, syncretism, and other false teachings.

     2. What Kind of “Conversion”?
     Even worse, the scourge of Christian nominalism brings re-
proach on the name of Christ from unbelievers in India. The push
for numbers and rapid growth in missions has resulted in much dis-
tortion and dilution of the gospel message today. People are taught
to “believe in Jesus,” “receive Jesus,” or “make a decision for Jesus”
without any of the biblical teaching on repentance. The so-called
“conversions” that result are nominal at best, manipulative at worst.
     Disregarding the biblical mandates and qualifications for
church elders (1 Tim. 3:1–7, esp. verse 6: “he must not be a new
convert”), missionaries appoint unqualified indigenous “leaders”
whose only “training” is a week-long seminar with a missionary team.

206 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


      In many cases, people “convert” in droves, believing that con-
verting to Christianity will bring them certain social or economic
benefits. Missionaries triumphantly send reports back home with
testimonies featuring stupendous and unfathomable statistics of
people converted and churches established. Ken R. Gnanakan, an
Indian theologian, responding to the church-growth movement sev-
eral years ago, phrased it well: “In our zeal to report back numbers to
our prayer partners, we have left congregations to continue to follow
their Hindu thinking, and apart from a change in name and place
of worship there is little difference between the so-called Christians
and their Hindu neighbors.”4
     3. False Conversions Lead to Persecution
     The plague of false conversions also has political ramifications
which leads to persecution. Hindus accuse Christians of luring un-
educated people and those of the lower castes by promising them
benefits. Group conversions and nominal Christianity finally result
in mass reversions back to Hinduism when underprivileged popula-
tions, who originally converted to Christianity hoping that it would
raise their social status, find that Hinduism may have more to offer
them politically.5

4   Ken R. Gnanakan, “Caste and the Indian Church: A Response to Donald McGavran,”
    Transformation 2 (1985): 24.
5   See the recent drive of the BJP government in India to pass an “anti-conversion” law and
    the spate of “homecoming” (ghar wapsi) reconversion ceremonies to Hinduism. PTI,
    “BJP Demands Anti-Conversion Law,” Zee News, December 29, 2014 [online]; available
    at http://zeenews.india.com/news/bihar/bjp-demands-anti-conversion-law_1522141.
    html; Pragya Kaushika, “Don’t Want a Religion that Only Rejects Us, Say the Aligarh
    Dalits on RSS list,” The Indian Express, December 14, 2014 [online]; available at
    http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/dont-want-a-religion-that-only-
    rejects-us-say-the-aligarh-dalits-on-rss-list/. Reconversion of mass groups of people to
    Hinduism has been fairly common in India for several years. See, for instance, Nirmala
    Carvalho, “Tamil Nadu: A Thousand Dalit Christians Reconvert to Hinduism,” Asia
    News, April 14, 2008 [online]; available at http://www.asianews.it/news-en/Tamil-
    Nadu:-A-thousand-Dalit-Christians-reconvert-to-Hinduism-12011.html.


207 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


     Most of these “reconversions” are accompanied with the testimo-
nies that say, “I used to be a Hindu, and I converted to Christianity
on the basis of several false promises. So now I’m coming back to
Hinduism.” Does not all of this raise the question of precisely what
sort of “conversion” is taking place? Certainly not the kind of divine-
wrought turning from darkness to light that we see on the pages of
the New Testament.

Indigenous Missions and the Inflation of Numbers
The other outgrowth of the Western obsession with numerical
growth is the large number of Indian “ministries” who have caught
on to the trend and are riding the wave—all the way to the bank. Yes,
the church in India is corrupt, as Yahweh says of Israel—“like a raw
wound” (Isa. 1:6). I speak as one who knows first-hand of the kind of
corruption that is pervasive across ministries in India.
      Many Indian ministries gladly inflate their numbers and de-
ceive Western supporters into believing that a great gospel “harvest”
is taking place. After all, it’s the numbers that bring in the cash.
      The techniques are tantamount: A large crowd of people is as-
sembled in a field and someone on a podium asks them how many
ate “puri-bhaji” (a staple in North India) for breakfast. Hands go
up, a picture is taken, and a picture report is published, reporting
“decisions for Christ.” In other cases, people are asked if they want
to receive a financial blessing or healing. Those who desire it raise
their hands, pictures are taken, and more “decisions for Christ” are
reported.
      On occasion, Western supporters visit, and some of them even
to “pastoral training and teaching.” So the Indian ministry will pay
a few pastors a token amount to show up for a couple of days. They
do. And the Western missionary goes back, happy and satisfied that

208 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


they have not just supported financially but have “invested” in the
lives of people who are “hungry for the Word” (and the free lunch).
      Many of these Indian ministers live in the lap of luxury, wining
and dining at 5-star hotels and getting driven around in luxury cars,
as a result of the dollars rolling into their ministries.
      It is with great sorrow I admit that my Western brothers and
sisters are very gullible—happy to give and support any ministry
that boasts big numbers. The statistics make their eyes glaze over,
and they are blinded to what actually takes place.

A Better Way
Is this a rebuke? Yes, in some ways it is. But I write out of heartfelt
love, and with a passion to see soundness and truth begin to take
root in missions work in India. Big numbers simply feed big egos
with the notion that we are doing something worthwhile for God.
But God’s real work simply cannot be measured by numbers alone.
     Last summer, I sat with a faithful Indian brother, an older man
of God who has labored for several decades in one of the hardest
and most unreached states in North India. He told me of Western
churches over the years who offered to support him, if only he would
diligently report a certain number of baptisms each month. In every
case, he refused, because he has always believed that conversion is
God’s work and cannot be manufactured. This man has not planted
thousands of churches. The numbers are not sexy and spectacular.
But the churches he has planted are sound, faithful, gospel-preach-
ing, and disciple-making. They are not phantoms. The disciples he
has made are those who know the Lord, and in them the Word of
Christ dwells richly. The fruit of his ministry shines like gold in the
dung-heap of other so-called “ministries” all around. And God will
reward his faithfulness.

209 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


      Let me share with you another personal story, this time, of a for-
eign missionary. I knew a missionary who lived and worked in India
for years—well over a decade. He established a business in a major
city and labored slowly and patiently. He barely had any converts—in
fact, he probably had only one. He died in India and within months
of his death, his business was destroyed. By numerical standards and
“strategic” considerations for “rapid growth,” he was a total failure. By
the standards of many Western mission agencies, the many dollars
given to support him over the years were a total waste.
      So was his ministry a waste? I think not: I was his one convert.
He taught me the gospel. He proclaimed to me the excellencies of
Christ. He taught me how to read the Bible and how to discern truth
from falsehood. He spent his life in service to his King, and my eter-
nity is changed as a result.
      So I plead with my brothers and sisters in the West: In your
sending of missionaries and in your support of indigenous gospel-
laborers, please prioritize faithfulness over efficiency, quality over
quantity, and growth in truth over growth in numbers. Am I opposed
to the growth of the church and the multiplication of disciples? By
no means! I long to see a great revival sweep across India. Indeed,
I pray that masses of people are evangelized and that countless
churches are established all across the nation.
      But let us not strive for manufactured numbers and “growth”
that come from sacrificing truth on the altars of efficiency and per-
ceived success. In the New Testament, the concern for numerical
growth never drives the mission of the church—a concern for the
glory of Christ does (Rom. 1:5). Conversion is the work of the Holy
Spirit who calls spiritually dead people out of darkness into the
marvelous light of the Lord Jesus as the gospel is proclaimed with
boldness and clarity. Therefore, do not use numbers as a yardstick

210 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


to measure God’s work, but rather let God’s work be measured
by the lives of people who “bear fruit in keeping with repentance”
(Matt. 3:8; Rom. 15:18). Rapid growth and multiplication may well
be one indicator of God’s blessing, but they are certainly never the
primary indicator. May our work be driven by Scripture rather than
statistics and strategies!

PART II: OVER-AWED BY THE “SUPERNATURAL”
I sit there, intrigued, as I listen to the man’s story. We are in an im-
portant and extremely unreached city in North India. Detail upon
intricate detail mounts as he narrates the amazing events that caused
him to renounce Sikhism for Christianity. I listen intently as he tells
us of the healing his mother received from a life-threatening illness,
his subsequent rise from rags to riches, the persecutions he has
faced, and, most importantly, the supernatural vision in which he
saw a figure cloaked in white who squeezed his hand and told him,
“I will bless you.”
      He rubs his moistened eyes, wiping away tears—and then he
tells us that though it has been over twenty years now, he can still
feel the hand of that otherworldly figure squeezing his hand today.
My Western friends listen, some of them wary, but a couple of them
are absolutely enthralled.
      My Indian co-laborer nudges me. We are all too familiar with the
gimmick; this is something we’ve seen and heard many times before.
The man finishes his story, and one of my Western friends, a sincere
brother—in fact, one who is fairly solid in his theology—remarks,
“Wow! Praise God! That’s such an awesome testimony brother!”
      Inwardly, I am flabbergasted. How is it that even people who
know their Bibles and understand the gospel well get duped by this stuff?
Isn’t the complete absence of the gospel in his testimony obvious?

211 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


     My Indian friend and I begin to explain to the man about the
true forgiveness of sins that only Jesus can provide, about Christ’s
death and resurrection and his sin-bearing substitutionary sacrifice
on the cross. He looks puzzled, for he has no idea what we’re talking
about! All he knows is that “Jesus is the only god who will bless you.”
That’s why he became a Christian. That’s why he became a pastor.
And he’s been a pastor for twenty years! He used to be a poor Sikh,
but now he’s driving a posh SUV as a “Christian bishop.” He drives
us to his “church” building, a multi-story mega-church that seats
3000, and tells us that he’s the “bishop” over a ministry that plants
several hundred churches every six months. But one could replace
the name “Jesus” everywhere in his testimony with the name of any
other god, and it wouldn’t make a difference.
     To make matters worse, this “bishop” has a Western missionary,
totally taken in by his story, functioning almost like his foot-servant.
Why not, since the missionary can report back all this bishop’s num-
bers as his own!
     Clearly, the West has an enchantment with the “supernatural.”
My intent here is not to enter into the debate over whether God still
operates supernaturally or not. Rather, I hope to alert my brothers
and sisters in the West to the dangers of being allured by sensational
stories that are devoid of the biblical gospel message. I also hope to
call my brethren in both India and the West to keep the gospel mes-
sage central in all our gospel work, and to prize the power of God’s
holy and authoritative Word above all else.

Has the Holy Spirit Migrated?
The Beatles. Madonna. Julia Roberts. Eat, Pray, Love. College stu-
dents without a job. One can think of a long list of people in the
West who are fascinated with the otherworldliness of Eastern spiri-
tuality. And this trend has found its way into the church as well. I’ve

212 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


grown weary of hearing it over and over: “We Western Christians
are so narrow-minded. We put God in a box! We place limits on
what he can do. That’s why we don’t see God work supernaturally
here like he does in the East.”
      Many of my brothers and sisters in the West have bought into
this false idea that the Western church is devoid of the Holy Spirit’s
supernatural work today; meanwhile, they say, the third person
of the Trinity is greatly active in the East in places like India and
China, where people are purportedly seeing dreams and visions and
miracles are happening all over the place. So in the West, people are
fascinated and allured by all the amazing testimonies and reports
they hear from what is happening “out there” on the mission field.
      But sadly, this fascination with the “supernatural” is often ac-
companied with a loss of discernment. At times, Westerners get so
googly-eyed with sensational stories from the East that they don’t
even notice the non-existence of any form of the gospel message.
      Beloved friends, wake up! The Holy Spirit has not transferred
locations. He is just as active in the West as he is anywhere else in
the world, doing what he has been sent to do—empowering wit-
ness to Christ ( John 15:26–27; Acts 1:16; 1 Pet. 1:12); convicting
the world concerning sin, righteousness, and judgment ( John 16:8);
leading the church into all truth ( John 16:13); glorifying Christ by
drawing people from darkness to light as the gospel message is pro-
claimed (2 Cor. 3:12–4:6); and sealing God’s people for the Day of
Redemption (Eph. 1:13).
      Oh, that we would recognize that the greatest, most supernatu-
ral work of God is when the Holy Spirit opens the eyes of sinners
to the glory of Christ, regenerating and renewing them through the
proclamation of the gospel, so that they are transferred out of the
kingdom of darkness and into the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ

213 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


in repentance and faith. Do we not realize that the Spirit of God is
sovereign and active, accomplishing this work in every place where
Christ is faithfully proclaimed from the Scriptures?
      I know of so many dear brothers and sisters in the West whose
testimony goes something like this: “I grew up in a Christian home.
From my youngest years, my parents taught me the Bible. My par-
ents loved the Lord. They pointed me to Christ and told me of his
sacrificial death on behalf of sinners. I was very young when I heard
the gospel, repented of my sins, and trusted Christ for salvation.
And so I’ve grown up almost all my life knowing the Lord.” Beloved
friends, is this less glorious or less supernatural in any way? Is this not
a demonstration of the Holy Spirit’s power to raise dead sinners to
life? Have we forgotten the glory of the gospel? Have we forgotten
that all of heaven celebrates when one sinner comes to repentance?
      Let us not emphasize other things, for this has disastrous
consequences.

The Fabrication of Testimonies That Titillate
Similar to the Western obsession with numbers, the West’s fasci-
nation with sensational stories has had a similar corrosive effect.
Testimonies are fabricated in order to dazzle and daze Western
believers into generously giving financial support. And once again,
I am sorry to say that my Western friends, even the theologically
sound ones, are gullible.
     In India, I have encountered professing Indian believers who
don’t say much to me by way of testimony—and why would they,
since I am just a fellow Indian? But these very people, when they
meet a Westerner, as soon as they see white skin, are quick to narrate
stories of dreams, visions, and amazing supernatural experiences.
     On more than one occasion, I have had the heartbreaking ex-
perience of meeting churches and believers in the West who have

214 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


had the awful experience of being duped by Indian “ministries.” For
instance, one Indian “evangelist” hoodwinked a whole network of
churches with his fantastic testimony.
      He claimed to have been raised as a religious Hindu, and his
family owned a snake that they worshipped daily. As an adult, he
was gripped with religious fervor and zeal for Hinduism. He was on
his way to attack and kill Christians when he saw a vision of Christ
that halted him and brought him to tears. He then became a Chris-
tian, resolving to proclaim the faith he once persecuted, and despite
being rejected by his family and friends, he is following Christ and
serving him as an evangelist.
      Several churches and ministries supported this “man of God,”
only to later learn that the entire story was made up. This man
actually grew up as the son of a pastor in a “Christian home,” and
fabricated this testimony because he learned that it is only testimo-
nies like this that generate support from the West. And let me assure
you that this story is not an isolated case. There are many, many oth-
ers like this one, and in every case, my Western brothers and sisters
are too quick to be amazed—and sadly—deceived.
      Such deception could be avoided by exercising more caution
and discernment, by verifying every detail of such testimonies (es-
pecially in view of their extraordinary details) on the account of
eye-witnesses, and by carefully checking if the person understands
the biblical gospel and prizes it above such experiences.
      When Western believers unwittingly get carried away with sen-
sational stories of the supernatural, not only does corruption thrive
in India, but so does false teaching. Even churches and believers who
decry the evils of the heretical prosperity gospel actually promote
its growth in India. How? By endorsing and supporting ministries
that emphasize great miracles while teaching the health-and-wealth

215 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


anti-gospel. This is also tied to the craze for numbers: the “prosper-
ity gospel” prospers and brings in the people by the droves. It thus
boasts of both supernatural “miracles” and big numbers.

Putting the Emphasis in the Right Place
My brothers and sisters, the only way for true gospel growth to
happen in India is for us to remember how gospel growth comes:
through the gospel. The gospel proclaims that all people everywhere
have sinned and rebelled against God our Creator and stand justly
condemned under his holy judgment; but God graciously saves
sinners through his Son Jesus Christ, who lived a sinless life, died
a sacrificial death on the cross as a substitute for sinners, and was
raised from the dead, so that all who repent of their wickedness
and trust in him alone receive full forgiveness of sins and eternal
life through him. The story of God’s great and supernatural plan of
salvation must take precedence over all other “supernatural stories.”
      Let’s not get carried away by stories of dreams and visions, but
let’s stand firm on the bedrock of God’s inspired Word. Even the
apostle Peter, who was an eye-witness to the glory of Christ on the
Mount of Transfiguration, who heard the very voice of God and saw
with his own eyes the Son of God in all his majestic glory, tells us
that we have something more sure than his experience. Something
“more fully confirmed, to which we would do well to pay atten-
tion”—the Bible (2 Pet. 1:16–21).
      The faithful Indian co-laborers that I know, who sincerely work
for true gospel growth in the hardest regions of India, do one simple
thing when anyone comes to them with stories of a dream or vi-
sion or anything else. Open God’s Word. Point them to the Bible.
Remind them that such “supernatural” occurrences might be shaky
and uncertain, but that Scripture is steadfast and true. Do we thank
God for dreams, visions, supernatural healings, deliverances, and

216 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


any other special acts of God’s providence that glorify Christ? Abso-
lutely. But the most supernatural work of all is when the Holy Spirit
brings people to submit to the supernatural book.
      My brothers and sisters in the West, in your support of gospel
work in India, will you be discerning and resolve not to get carried
away by the sensational stuff? Will you remember that the proclama-
tion of the gospel and the teaching of the Scriptures are what produces
a people conformed to Christ’s image? Will you ensure that any “gos-
pel work” that you endorse or support is founded on the message of
Christ’s death and resurrection for sinners, the gospel of repentance
and faith, and God’s holy and inspired Word? I pray that you will.
      So, the next time you hear a supernatural testimony from India
(or anywhere), be careful to discern whether the person has truly
understood the gospel. And be careful to ensure that God receives
the glory above all else for his marvelous supernatural work in saving
lost sinners.

PART III: OVER-EAGER FOR
CONTEXTUALIZATION
The scene was so disorienting, it felt like it must be from a Holly-
wood (or Bollywood) movie. We are in a bustling bazaar in a large
city in Northern India. A white dude in skinny jeans rides up on a
mini-motorcycle to meet us. He guides us through narrow “gullies”
(alleyways) into the small and crowded neighborhood in which he
lives and works. We hear about the ministry that he and his friend
are engaged in here. Their goal: to win a particular people group
to Christ.
      But they don’t want to work alongside the established national
church. They want to win people groups to Christ, but they don’t
want to teach these people what it looks like to be followers of
Christ. Rather, they want people to be able to follow Christ “from

217 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


within their own cultures.” Yet in many cases, what results is a
hodge-podge mix of religion that has virtually no resemblance to
biblical Christianity.
      There are more than a few such foreign workers laboring in India.
      I’ve already mentioned the craze for numbers and the West’s
fascination with “supernatural” testimonies. Here, I wish to address
another issue that is quickly gaining traction and causing problems
in India, much like it has in the Muslim world: extreme forms of
“contextualization.”
      Now, what do I mean by contextualization? The word used in
missions scholarship to describe how the gospel should be fleshed
out and made clear in varying cultures. Am I opposed to contextu-
alization? Of course not! In my years of ministry in India, I’ve never
worn a tie to preach. I often preach barefoot, and the congregations
are dressed in Indian attire and seated on the floor. When I preach in
the West, I am almost always in suit and tie. The tone of my preach-
ing is different, the illustrations I use are different, and the matters to
which I apply the Scriptures are different, all depending on context.
And yes, my wife wore a saree (and not a dress) on our wedding day.
Certainly, I am thankful for the many Western missionaries who
contextualize the Bible’s message in ways that are biblically war-
ranted, helpful, and appropriate to the culture.
      My purpose here is not to criticize contextualization. Neither
do I wish to get into nuanced discussions about the spectrum of
contextualization and how much contextualization is legitimate.
Rather, I wish to raise awareness about certain illegitimate forms of
contextualization that are taking root in India. These forms of con-
textualization receive their impetus from Western missionaries who
refuse to cooperate with the established national churches, believing
that they understand more about Indian culture than anyone else.

218 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


And much like the “Insider Movements” of the Islamic world, most
of these teachings result in false and heretical movements in India,
far removed from biblical Christianity. It is my prayer that what I
share here would challenge brothers and sisters in the West to cease
supporting missionaries who propagate false teachings and practice
harmful methods of ministry.

Hindu Followers of Christ?
Some of my encounters with Western Christian workers in India
leave me feeling deeply disturbed. Last summer, I was visiting India
when my ministry team bumped into one of these guys—an Ameri-
can who has spent almost the last decade in India. He considers us
Indian Christians too “Westernized,” and he thinks that he’s more
attuned to Indian culture, for he celebrates Indian festivals and prac-
tices several Indian-Hindu customs—customs that Indian believers
such as myself have rejected. This Westerner believes that the things
he does will help remove barriers to belief among the high caste
Hindus he’s seeking to reach.
      There are others like him who dot the missions landscape.
They come from varied backgrounds in the West, but a lot of them
are latte-sipping, skinny-jeans-wearing Christian hipsters from the
West coast or Canada, who for whatever reason, seem to have grown
bored or disillusioned with traditional Christianity. They’re looking
for something new. They’ve read the latest and greatest books on
missions, contextualization, and culture (and perhaps a smattering
of emergent church literature and post-modern philosophy). And
so they come to India and try to form communities of “Yeshu-Baktha
Hindus” or “Hindu disciples of Jesus.” They don’t want to be identi-
fied as “Christians” because they consider this “too Western” (never
mind Acts 11:26!).

219 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


      In these communities, a puja or Hindu initiation ritual per-
formed in Jesus’s name takes the place of Christian baptism. The
“Lord’s Supper” consists in the breaking of a coconut and drink-
ing of coconut water. Bhajans (Hindu devotional songs) are sung
in Jesus’s name instead of Christian hymns. The place of worship
is lit up by little diyas (Indian oil lamps typically used in Hindu
religious ceremonies). Preaching finds no place in these communi-
ties, for “monologue” is considered a Western idea. These groups are
led by “gurus” instead of “pastors.” And the storyline of Scripture is
replaced by a storyline borrowed from the indigenous culture: Jesus
is understood in terms of Hindu mythology, and Jesus’s sacrifice is
interpreted in light of the Vedas.
      Many who propagate such teachings typically do it from good
motives. They are wary of a colonialist form of missions that impos-
es Western culture on indigenous Christians. They truly want to see
an indigenous Christian movement established. They’ve bought into
the latest “missions research” which says that removing cultural bar-
riers to belief is the best way to achieve church growth. And so they
dress up Christianity in the garb of specific cultural groups hoping
that these groups would accept the Christian faith while retaining
their own culture.

Shall We Provoke the Lord to Jealousy?
Sadly, these well-meaning proponents of “contextualized” Christi-
anity do not realize that they are presenting a garbled gospel and
forming sub-Christian communities. I will respond here by identify-
ing four serious problems with these “contextualization” movements.

    1. Syncretism and a Biblical Worldview
    First, the natural result of such kinds of “contextualization” is
syncretism of the worst kinds—a dangerous and damning mix of

220 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


the Hindu and Christian worldviews. In more serious cases, I do
not hesitate to call the movements heretical. The eager proponents
of “contextualization” think they are preserving Indian culture, but
they do not realize that for Indians (unlike in the West), culture,
worldview, and religion are inextricably intertwined. Most Indians,
including “Westernized Christians” such as myself, as well as former
Hindus who have trusted in Christ, recognize this fact.
      The close link between culture and religion in the Indian
mind is the reason that most Indians have a negative impression of
Christianity, for they assume that all Western cultures are “Christian
cultures.” But we know Christianity is not a product of “Western”
culture. Rather, the Christian message is a worldview that trans-
forms all cultures, both Eastern and Western. The gospel demands a
renunciation of secular thinking, immorality, and profligate living in
the West, just as it demands a renunciation of idolatry and supersti-
tion in the East. We must proclaim the trans-cultural lordship and
glory of Jesus, rather than hyper-orienting our message and praxis
around specific cultural groups.
      The Apostles never permitted pagan cultures to influence the
biblical message or the form of Christian worship. Rather, even in a
pagan culture like Corinth, Paul gives the Scriptures pre-eminence.
Writing to a predominantly Gentile congregation in Corinth, Paul
calls these believers to see their identity in terms of the biblical story-
line (1 Cor. 10). Paul prescribes what should happen in their worship
services and even dictates to them how they should take the Lord’s
Supper (1 Cor.º11–14). Paul proclaims the death and resurrection
of Christ in “accordance with the Scriptures” (1 Cor. 15:3–4), and
not some cultural metanarrative from Corinth. Scripture forms the
people of God, not vice versa. I have often wondered if a connection
exists between contextualization movements and the influence of

221 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


post-modernism. The authority is shifted from the revealed Word
to the community of readers.
      Proponents of “contextualized” movements disregard the bibli-
cal principle that darkness has no fellowship with light, and Christ
has no part with Belial (2 Cor. 6:14–15). And Christ’s Word is mu-
tilated in the name of “contextualization.”
      When Indian national believers advance these criticisms, we
are labeled as being “Westernized.” In fact, Indian “Christian back-
ground” believers are told that we have no right to speak on such
issues at all, for we are the root cause of the problem. But even when
“Hindu background” believers voice their concerns—and I know
several who do—they are sidelined as having already been “West-
ernized.” The irony is astonishing: These are Westerners claiming
that they know more about Indian culture than Indians who have
been born and raised in India.

     2. Christ Commands Us to “Teach”
     Some of the more moderate “contextualization” advocates
with whom I’ve interacted tell me that they do not want Western
understandings of Christianity to be imposed on people in India.
Therefore, instead of teaching Indians what Christian life and wor-
ship looks like, they ask them to read the Bible and come to their
own conclusions. Sounds good, doesn’t it?
     Perhaps, if Christ hadn’t commanded us otherwise. The Great
Commission includes the call to make disciples, teaching them to
obey all of Christ’s commands (Matt. 28:18–20). And Christ’s com-
mands are revealed in the apostolic Word—the Bible. The Bible sets
the agenda. The Bible forms Christian identity. The Bible shows
us what Christian life and worship looks like. And the Bible tells
us that Jesus equips his people through teachers (Eph. 4:11). This
means that we must interpret and apply the Word of God across

222 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


ethnic and cultural lines—much like Paul the former Jew did in the
congregations that he formed in Gentile and pagan cultures. The
notion that communities should read and come to their own con-
clusions is actually rooted in the post-modern mindset that places
authority in the community rather than in the text.

      3. “Insider Movements” and “Secret Believers”
      Another result of “contextualization” movements is the
emergence of Hindu “insider movements.” Proponents of “insider
movements” teach people to remain as “secret believers” or as “Hindu
devotees of Jesus” (Yeshu-Bakhta Hindus) so that they will not be
excluded from their families and communities but can instead stay
on the inside in order to “eventually win more converts to Christ.”
Furthermore, those who advocate these forms of contextualiza-
tion—in direct violation of 2 Corinthians 6:14–18 (also 1 Cor.
7:39)—teach people to prefer marriage to unbelievers from their
same backgrounds and ethnic caste groups over marriage to believ-
ers of other groups. They also insist that “Hindu followers of Jesus”
should never intermarry with “Christian background believers.”
      The pragmatic desires to maintain cultures and grow the church
result in a dilution of the gospel message, and a casting aside of the
call to follow Christ at the cost of persecution and exclusion from
one’s kin (Matt. 10:34–38; Mark 8:31–38; John 15:18–25; 16:33;
2 Tim. 3:12).
      This testimony of a sister in Christ from a Hindu background
illustrates the point:

      When I became a Christian, there were some people in my area who started
      teaching me that I should remain a “secret believer” and not inform any-
      body of my faith. They did not want me to be excluded from my family.
      Therefore they encouraged me to live as a “secret believer” so that I could


223 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


      remain within my family, hoping that eventually my family and community
      would also come to Christ. When I moved to a different area to start a job,
      I learned that this teaching was seriously wrong. I found great freedom in
      finally expressing my faith in Christ openly and boldly told my parents and
      community. I told them about Jesus and the work he has done in my life.
      Though I was rejected and ostracized at first, after ten years, my family fi-
      nally began to respect my decision to follow Christ. They even attended my
      wedding to a Christian believer in the church!


      Indian church leaders like myself and my Indian co-laborers
call people to be open and committed followers of Christ and to
come under the authority and discipleship of the local church. In
response, proponents of “contextualization” condemn us for practic-
ing “extraction evangelism” (taking individuals out of their families
and communities) and not “stimulating the growth of people move-
ments.” But if I remember correctly, it was Jesus who declared that
those who follow him would be hated by all for his name’s sake, and
that a person would find enemies among those of his own house-
hold, yet one must embrace and follow Jesus at the cost of all these
(Matt. 10:34–39). The New Testament tells us that Christians are
“sojourners and exiles” who have been “rejected by men” but are “cho-
sen and precious in the sight of God” (1 Pet. 2:4–11). Believers are
called to bear the reproach of Christ, going with him “outside the
camp” (Heb. 13:12–13).

     4. What They Do When It Doesn’t Work
     The irony of it all is that when it comes to truly winning people
to Christ in India, “contextualization” proponents fail dramatically.
Virtually no one is won to Christ, for when the gospel is not clearly
proclaimed, there is no power to draw people from darkness to light.
In fact, very few Indians are interested in joining a movement that

224 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions


looks in every way the same as their own religion but simply has a
new god tacked on. One of the Westerners I mentioned above has
lived in India for several years and has adopted all these Indian cus-
toms, but no one seems interested in his teaching.
     And so, desperate for some kind of success, some of these
groups resort to shameful and underhanded tactics. They begin to
enter the established Indian churches that they once spurned. They
give some impression of reaching out for fellowship and try to gain
the trust of national church leaders. And after making their way
into the established church, they begin to target new believers who
have recently embraced Christ from Hindu backgrounds—those
who are weak and facing imminent persecution and rejection, those
who are learning what it costs to follow Christ. The “contextualiza-
tion” proponents then begin to brainwash these weak and fledgling
believers, teaching them that they are being “Westernized.” They
are told not to give up their Hindu identity: “You don’t need to be
a Christian—instead, be a ‘Hindu follower of Jesus.’” This is how
many “contextualization” proponents find their “converts.” I know,
because I’ve seen it happen over and over, and I’ve known struggling
baby believers who have fallen into these traps. When things like
this happen, I pray that the Lord would obliterate such “ministries.”

Moving Forward
Okay, perhaps by reading this article you’ve been stirred to take this
issue more seriously—what now? How can you help prevent the
growth of these kinds of false and destructive teachings?
     1. Please be very careful whom you support. Most of these
Western workers on the field have been funded by orthodox, evan-
gelical, Bible-believing churches who would be utterly horrified to
learn of what those they support are doing on the field. Please be
cautious. Hold all your supported missionaries to rigorous doctrinal

225 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


accountability and periodically check in on them to ensure that they
are teaching the truth.
      2. Always be careful to review the values and distinctives of
mission agencies and refuse to support any mission agency that ad-
vocates these extreme forms of contextualization. Contextualization
is necessary in every cross-cultural endeavor, but beware the forms
of contextualization that fall short of biblical Christianity.
      3. If you’re seeking to be a missionary, resolve that you will not
ignore the established national church. Whenever possible, partner
with faithful national church leaders, so that you better understand
the culture and how the gospel should take shape in that culture. I
know this can be challenging, and in many cases national churches
are corrupt, unhealthy, or non-existent. But if at all possible, strive
to find faithful and doctrinally sound national brothers with whom
you can partner. I assure you—they exist. If you are in a pioneer
endeavor where no national church exists, be careful to understand
the culture well. Make a distinction between those forms of culture
that are religious and those that are not. Do not shrink back from
teaching the “whole counsel of God”—which means teaching people
to embrace Christianity as an entire worldview. Teach them to reject
cultural practices where the Scripture demands it and be certain that
all your “contextualization” is biblically warranted.




226 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                The Case for
             Long-Term Missions
                        BROOKS BUSER




“Missions,” in our day, seems to be the umbrella term for an ever-
expanding set of jobs, callings, ambitions, and church programs.
      Gone are the days when the word represented those who would
set out for the field knowing it was likely a one-way trip. This type of
missions aimed at converts, finished Bible translations, and churches
that would last generations. Missions was seen as a lifetime endeavor,
not a task to be completed. Of course, this is partly because of techno-
logical limitations; round-trip transatlantic journeys are much more
difficult than round-trip transatlantic flights. And yet, I suspect there
also exists some philosophical disagreement as well as to what the goal
of “missions” actually is. What previous generations called “missions”
we have specified and relabeled as “long-term missions.”
      The point of this article is not to knock short-term work, mercy
ministries, social programs, and other good endeavors. These are all
helpful in their own way. But we should be aware that short-term
endeavors, by their very nature, are insufficient to establish genera-
tional churches by the power of the gospel.
      My goal is not to rebuke anyone but to remind all of us that
long-term missions is costly—and it’s worth it. It’s worth prioritiz-
ing over everything else. True churches take years to plant. . . in the
English-speaking world. How much more so where “no foundation
has been laid”?
      When it comes to the church, faster is not better.

227 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


THE VALUE OF LONG-TERM MISSIONS
Let’s consider a few reasons to prioritize long-term missions.

First, Long-Term Missions Adorns the Gospel
My wife and I lived overseas for thirteen years among the Yembiy-
embi people in Papua New Guinea. During that time, we observed
the gradual metamorphosis of cross-cultural church planters who
lived among the people long-term. Their English started to bend
around the local language. Their knees and ankles grew calluses from
constantly sitting cross-legged. Their appetites changed. Their very
bodies started to take on marks that lent credibility to the gospel.
     As missionaries die to calendars and buy into long-term min-
istry that looks, smells, and sounds like the people whom God
has sent them to, they model the heart of the message they seek
to proclaim. We see a biblical example of this in Paul’s love for the
Ephesian church. It’s clear the Ephesian elders know him not as an
at-arms-length leader, but rather as a dear friend.

      You yourselves know how I lived among you the whole time from the first
      day that I set foot in Asia, serving the Lord with all humility and with tears
      and with trials that happened to me through the plots of the Jews; how I did
      not shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, and teaching
      you in public and from house to house. (Acts 20:18–20)



Second, Long-Term Ministry Is Necessary if Healthy
Churches Are the Goal
Let’s return to Paul’s farewell speech for a moment. As he leaves his
friends behind, he seems to be most concerned about their church.
He said, “Pay careful attention to yourselves and to all the flock, in
which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to care for the church

228 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Case for Long-Term Missions


of God, which he obtained with his own blood. I know that after
my departure fierce wolves will come in among you, not sparing the
flock” (Acts 20:28–29).
     Establishing long-term churches requires long-term workers.
God may grant that converts are made in a short amount of time, but
to see disciples gathered into a self-led, self-taught, self-propagating
body of believers—led by men qualified according to 1 Timothy 3
and Titus 1—is always a long-term venture.
     There are shorter, quicker, “more efficient” methods that are
common in our day. They celebrate strategies that seem to circum-
vent the need for patience. For example, they utilize unbelievers as
teachers, they view language fluency as a time-consuming encum-
brance to ministry, and they prefer oral translations over the written
Word.1 Indeed, these new methods shave off years and years of time,
which leads to unprecedented increases in “converts” and “churches.”
     But make no mistake, the cost of that speed is paid in full by the
churches left behind.
     When short-term workers and methods were introduced in
Burma, Adoniram Judson’s views were quite clear. He wrote,

      I fear that this will occasion a breach in our mission. How can we, who are
      devoted for life, cordially take to our hearts one who is a mere hireling? I
      have seen the beginning, middle, and end of several limited-term mission-
      aries. . . Though brilliant in an English pulpit, they are incompetent for any
      real missionary work. They come out for a few years, with the view of ac-
      quiring a stock of credit on which they may vegetate the rest of their days, in

1    This is a helpful article that speaks to the current problem: Aubrey Sequeira,
    “A Plea for Gospel Sanity in Missions,” 9Marks, https://www.9marks.org/
    article/a-plea-for-gospel-sanity-in-missions/.


229 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


       the congenial climate of their native land. . . The motto of every missionary,
       whether preacher, printer, or schoolmaster, ought to be “Devoted for life.”2


     To our modern ears, Judson’s concern may sound overstated.
But should it? He knew what so many in pioneering, church-planting
contexts intuitively grasp: if the church left behind is to be healthy,
then only a long-term approach will do.

THE COST OF LONG-TERM MISSIONS
One of the primary reasons long-term missions is rarer in our day
is that the cost is so awfully high. The unreached language groups
of our time are the last ones reached for a reason. I lead a missions
training organization called Radius.3 We exist to equip students
who plan to invest their lives among the unreached and unengaged.
The students who come to us are uncommon, and they quite often
come from uncommon families and uncommon churches. The desire
to spend fifteen, twenty, or thirty years in some of the most difficult
locations on earth requires everyone involved to know the cost.

The Cost to the Family
Saying goodbye to sons, daughters, grandchildren, and futures that
will never be realized; walking away from family businesses and holi-
days at home—this cost is so high. But it’s worth it.
     In his excellent biography4 of the life of John G. Paton, Paul
Schlehlein describes Paton’s decision to leave behind a thriving
ministry and go to a land that had recently claimed some of his

2   Courtney Anderson, To the Golden Shore, (Little Brown and Company, Judson Press,
    1987), pg. 409
3   Radius International, https://radiusinternational.org/.
4   Banner of Truth, “John G. Paton: Biography,” https://banneroftruth.org/us/store/
    history-biography/john-g-paton-biography/.


230 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Case for Long-Term Missions


fellow countrymen. Paton’s parents were among the few who spoke
in support of his going. Schlehlein reflects on this fact with this
helpful insight:

       Let every person note the weight such wise counsel will have upon their
       children’s lives. Let every parent who clutches jealously to kith and kin pon-
       der Paton’s godly parents. Let them contemplate whether it be hypocrisy to
       sing “Give of thy sons to bear the message glorious,” but “glorious” only if that
       son belongs to someone else. When it seemed the whole world of Christian
       influence impeded Paton’s plans, it was the words of his parents that but-
       tressed his resolve. Whatever uncertainty he may have had, it melted like
       snow atop the glowing hearth of what he learned in his home.5


     When we read things like this, it sounds superhuman. How can
“normal” Christians see their sons and daughters board ships and
planes and be gone for decades, perhaps forever?
     The only sufficient answer I have found is this: these saints see
past this world. By God’s immeasurable grace, they measure things
not in years, but in eternity.
     Near the end of his life, Paton saw his own sons off to the mis-
sion field. By this point, he had lost his first wife and seven children.
And yet, this is what he writes, “I deeply rejoice—when I breathe the
prayer that it may please the blessed Lord to turn the hearts of all
my children to the mission field; and that he may open up their way
and make it their pride and joy to live and die in carrying Jesus and
his gospel into the heart of the heathen world.”6

5   Paul Schlehlein, John G Paton: Missionary to the Cannibals of the South Seas, (The
     Banner of Trust, Edinburgh, UK, 2017), pg. 96
6   John G. Paton: Missionary to the New Hebrides, (Banner of Truth Trust, Edinburgh,
     UK, 2016), pg. 444


231 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


The Cost to the Church
      Since coming back to the United States in 2016, I’ve noticed
lots of people end up in the mission field for the wrong reasons. In
many evangelical quarters, the thinking goes something like this:
“He or she is kind of awkward, kind of strange, and not very dis-
ciplined. But he or she is super sincere—and loves lost people. We
would never make them an elder or a deacon. But you know what?
They might be perfect for the mission field!”
      The rise of an “anyone can be a missionary” mentality has
brought more people into missions, but “more isn’t always better.” In
fact, more missionaries sometimes compromise our goal of a clear,
competent, and theologically rigorous gospel witness.7
      David Brainerd preached to thousands in the English-speaking
world before giving his life to missions. He turned down dozens of
senior pastor positions, even the option of serving alongside Jonathan
Edwards.8 Before William Chalmers Burns gave his life to ministry
in China, he was hand-picked by Robert Murray M’Cheyne to pas-
tor his church for over a year, and membership increased.9 These
weren’t flighty, searching men with nothing better to do. They were
serious, dedicated, and gifted.
      We should aim to send such men and women.
      Some might say, “Wait! If we send our best, then what hap-
pens to our churches here?” Sometimes, the benefit of the nations is
viewed as a loss to the sending church. But that’s not true. The Lord
will equip his churches anywhere with what they need for maturity.

7    This is a helpful article on why more missionaries is not always better, from
     one on the field: Steven Jennings, “Stop Sending Missionaries: Why
     More Isn’t Always Better,” 9Marks, https://www.9marks.org/article/
     stop-sending-missionaries-why-more-isnt-always-better/.
8   John Piper, 21 Servants of Sovereign Joy, (Crossway, Wheaton, IL, 2018), pg. 222-223
9   Michael D. McMullen, God’s Polished Arrow, (Christian Focus, 2001)


232 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Case for Long-Term Missions


Ephesians 4:11–16 applies to churches in America and churches in
places we will never go, among peoples we will never see.
     Sending your best is costly, but it’s worth it. And it jeopardizes
exactly nothing.

THE GLORY OF LONG-TERM MISSIONS
The Glory of a Strong, New Testament Church
We speak often at Radius of finishing well. As we’ve already seen,
finishing well means seeing a strong, New Testament church estab-
lished where none existed. The Scriptures and church history know
nothing of Christians who are content with converts and lukewarm
to the task of solidifying a local church.
     But here’s the unfortunate truth: starters in church planting are
common; finishers are rare.
     In Acts 20 again, we see Paul’s abiding vision of finishing well.

      And now, behold, I am going to Jerusalem, constrained by the Spirit, not
      knowing what will happen to me there, except that the Holy Spirit testifies
      to me in every city that imprisonment and afflictions await me. But I do not
      account my life of any value nor as precious to myself, if only I may finish
      my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to
      the gospel of the grace of God. (Acts 20:22–24)


     Should we not assume Paul expected the same devotion to the
church of Ephesus from the elders who stayed behind?
     On the last page of John Paton’s autobiography, we find
his exhortation for those who would come behind him: “Plant
down your forces in the heart of one tribe or race where the same
language is spoken. Work solidly from that center, building up

233 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


with patient teaching and lifelong care a church that will endure”
(emphasis added).10
      Even the best of missionaries can’t accomplish this over several
summer trips or even five-to-ten-year stints. It takes, as Paton says,
“lifelong care.”
      God may allow certain missionaries to see this task completed
in a shorter period of time. But for the vast majority, it will be a long,
arduous process with a steep price tag.
      For John Paton it took 42 years. For Adoniram Judson, it took
forty. Paton lost his first wife and seven children; Judson buried two
wives and nine children. Both faced sickness, shipwreck, spears, bro-
ken bones, and a myriad of other trials. But they were ultimately
spared by God to finish the work he had called them to.
      This is Paton’s final analysis:

       Let me record my immovable conviction that this is the noblest service in
       which any human being can spend or be spent; and that, if God gave me back
       my life to be lived over again, I would without one quiver of hesitation lay it
       on the altar to Christ, that he might use it as before in similar ministries of
       love, especially amongst those who have never yet heard of the name of Jesus.11



CONCLUSION
Friends, for nearly 2000 years, the people of God have been marked
by patient, quiet endurance while leaving the results to God. Long-
term missions is our heritage. May we raise up many to carry on that
heritage to the ends of the earth.



10 John G. Paton: Missionary to the New Hebrides, (Banner of Truth Trust, Edinburgh,
   UK, 2016), pg. 496
11 Ibid pg. 444


234 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                      The Lost Coin
                             MARK DEVER




In Luke 15, Jesus tells the story of a woman who has lost a coin and
sweeps her entire house looking for it. It’s clearly not a large coin. It’s
clearly not laying in the middle of the floor. It’s probably a smaller
coin—somewhere in a corner.
     Reflecting on that lost coin, I am left wondering about the lost
souls in the world today. Particularly those whom none of us are
trying to reach.

FOUR LANES OF MISSIONS
While the varieties of cross-cultural Christian ministry are nearly
infinite, Brooks Buser has summarized1 and categorized those vari-
eties into four “lanes”—each of which is important and strategic for
the mission of church. He describes these lanes as:
     1. Training national pastors
     2. English-speaking churches in cross-cultural contexts
     3. Church planting in national or majority languages
     4. Reaching those within minority language groups that are
          currently unreached by the gospel
     The fourth is the focus of this brief article.

1   Brooks Buser, “A Better Way to Look at Missions,” 9Marks, https://www.9marks.
    org/article/a-better-way-to-look-at-missions/.


235 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


LANE 4 IN PRACTICE
It goes without saying that addressing the first three lanes of mis-
sions occurs more easily and naturally. The work necessary to access
these communities safely, learn two languages (one that likely doesn’t
have a writing system), translate the Bible, and persevere through
some of the hardest living conditions in the world is extremely dif-
ficult. Pastors and church leaders naturally build relationships with
those who are Christians from across the world in educational or
conference settings. The cross fertilization that takes place gives rise
to countless plans to send workers to help churches in other lands.
Many of these connections encourage missions work in Lanes 1–3.
      Lane 4, however, seems to require the concentrated attention of
one who searches for a coin in the corner. It’s not going to get swept
up easily or quickly. It’s going to take more intentionality, more
deliberation, and more time. These things are required of both the
individual who wants to go, and (even more fundamentally) on the
part of the church from which they are sent.

LANE 4 IN THE BIBLE
We see Lane 4 missions described in a number of ways in the Bi-
ble. From “all families” in God’s promise to Abraham to “all nations”
in the Great Commission. From Isaiah’s prophecy concerning the
“ends of the earth” to John’s vision of the “great multitude . . . from
every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages.” Further-
more, Paul’s logic in Romans 10 should lead us to continuously
consider our approach to Lane 4 missions: “How will they hear
without someone preaching?”
      Ever since those unnamed Christians returned to their home-
lands after Pentecost, the Great Commission has been pushed
forward to the ends of the earth by people whose names we won’t
know until heaven. The great majority of gospel advance, no doubt,

236 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Lost Coin


has taken place through the humble witness of men and women
about whom no biographies ever have been—or could be—written.
     And yet, we stand on the shoulders of those unknown wit-
nesses. Occasionally, a flash of celebrity reveals to us a small part of
our history. We know about Paul’s entrance into Macedonia, but we
don’t know that there weren’t Macedonians present at Pentecost. We
know Paul’s desire to get to Spain, but we don’t know if other Chris-
tians had arrived there before him. We know that by the time Paul
wrote to the churches in Rome, where he had never been, he could
already name 26 Christians who were there in the imperial capital.

LANE 4 IN OUR CHURCHES
The fact that any people remain in gospel darkness under God is
the responsibility of his churches. We are the ones who send out
preachers. How are we doing?
      If we wait until members volunteer themselves for this work—
if we as pastors are passive in the matter—are we obeying Paul’s
command in Romans 10? What steps can we take to encourage our
congregations to be sending congregations? If we don’t have a Paul
and a Barnabas identifying themselves to us, can we pray that the
Lord of the harvest would send out more laborers? Can we pray that
publicly? Can we start prayer groups to pray for the language groups
among whom there is no gospel witness?
      These and many other questions pour into the mind of the
honest and sympathetic reader of Paul’s logic in Romans 10. As we
look around today, we ought to praise God for the spread of the gos-
pel since Christ gave the Great Commission. Yet we cannot forget
the darkness of ignorance that has not yet been dispelled. There are
still more places that need the light.
      The path of light to reach those lost in darkness can begin with
the pastors of churches who ask questions like:

237 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
9. MISSIONS


    • Is there anything more I should be doing as a pastor?
    • Is there anything more that our church should be doing?
    • How should our support of 4th Lane missions look different
       than what we do to encourage the other missions lanes that
       we happily support?
    • Would it be worth our elders having a dedicated discussion
       about this?
    I share these questions with you because I’m wrestling with
them right now. Pray for me, as I pray for us.




238 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                               APPENDIX

                   The Church:
               Universal and Local1
                       JONATHAN LEEMAN




DEFINITION
The universal church is a heavenly and eschatological assembly of
everyone—past, present, and future—who belongs to Christ’s new
covenant and kingdom. A local church is a mutually-affirming group
of new covenant members and kingdom citizens, identified by regu-
larly gathering together in Jesus’s name through preaching the gospel
and celebrating the ordinances.

SUMMARY
The New Testament word translated into English as “church” (ekkle-
sia) means assembly, and the New Testament envisions two kinds of
assemblies: one in heaven and many on earth. These two kinds are
the universal and local church, respectively. To become a Christian is
to become a member of the universal church, whereby God raises us
up with Christ and seats us in the heavenly place. Yet membership
in the heavenly assembly must “show up” on earth, which Christians
do by gathering together in the name of Christ through the preach-
ing of the gospel and mutually affirming one another as belonging
to him through the ordinances. The heavenly universal church, in

1 Editor’s note: This article was originally printed at TGC and is reprinted here by
   permission.


239 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
APPENDIX


other words, creates earthly local churches, which in turn display
the universal church. Christians throughout history have sometimes
emphasized the local or the universal church to the neglect of the
other, but a biblical posture emphasizes both. Such a posture entails
pursuing one’s individual discipleship in a local church, but a local
church that partners with other churches.

TWO USES OF THE WORD ‘CHURCH’
What exactly is the church? A brand-new Christian who begins
reading the Bible might find him or herself initially confused try-
ing to answer that question. On one page, Jesus says that he will
build his church, and that the gates of hell will not prevail against
it (Matt. 16:18). The new Christian considers how Jesus uses the
word “church” here and rightly concludes that he intends the church
to be something broad, comprised of vast numbers of members
from around the globe and over centuries of time. Then, a couple
pages later, the young believer encounters Jesus telling the disciples
they should address unresolved sin by telling it “to the church”
(Matt. 18:17). Now he or she wonders if a church isn’t in fact a spe-
cific group of people located in one place.
      Turning to Paul’s epistles similarly reveals two different uses
of the word. In one moment, Paul talks about “coming together
as a church,” like it’s an assembly (1 Cor. 11:18). In the next he
writes that “God has appointed in the church first apostles, sec-
ond prophets, third teachers,” like it is something much bigger
(1 Cor. 12:28).
      What the young believer is discovering, of course, is how the
Bible uses the word “church” in both a universal and a local sense.
      At the most basic lexical level, the Greek word ekklesia,
which the English Bibles translate as “church,” means assembly. Yet
Scripture employs the word to refer to two kinds of assembly: a

240 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Church: Universal and Local


heavenly one and an earthly one. Christians refer to these as the
universal church and the local church, respectively.

UNIVERSAL CHURCH—A HEAVENLY ASSEMBLY
The universal church should come first in our thinking because
people “join” the universal church or heavenly assembly by becoming
Christians.
     Salvation, after all, is covenantal. By the new covenant, Jesus
Christ secured not just individuals but a people for himself, all of
which he accomplished through his life, death, and resurrection.
Yet by uniting a people to him, he also united them to one another.
Listen to how the apostle Peter puts it:

      “Once you were not a people, but now you are God’s people; once you had
      not received mercy, but now you have received mercy” (1 Pet. 2:10; see also
      Eph. 2:1–21).


     Peter places the second line about receiving God’s saving mercy
in parallel with the first line about becoming God’s people. The two
things happened together.
     Fittingly, one crucial metaphor for our salvation is adoption
(Rom. 8:15; Gal. 4:5; Eph. 1:5). To be adopted by a father and
mother is to receive—derivatively but simultaneously—a new set of
brothers and sisters. And this is the universal church—all the new
brothers and sisters we have received from across time and around
the world who belong to this new covenant people.
     Why then say that the universal church is in heaven? Upon
saving us by grace, Paul says, God “raised us up with Christ
and seated us with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus”
(Eph. 2:6; see also Col. 3:1, 3). By our union with Christ we

241 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
APPENDIX


are seated in the heavens, meaning, we possess standing and a
place in God’s heavenly throne room. All the prerogatives and
protections of that place belong to us because we are sons and
daughters of the king. We are there. Yet Paul goes on: Not only
have we been vertically reconciled, being raised up and seated in
the heavenly realms. A horizontal reconciliation follows: “now in
Christ Jesus you who once were far away have been brought near
by the blood of Christ,” such that “he himself is our peace, who
has made the two groups one” (Eph. 2:13, 14). Which means: if
you are sitting with Christ in the heavenly realms, you are also
seated with everyone else seated in those realms. This is the
heavenly assembly, or the universal church, which Paul goes on
to discuss in the following chapters (3:10, 21; 5:23–32).
     The author of Hebrews highlights the heavenly location of this
assembly even more explicitly for his Christian audience:

      You have come to—the heavenly Jerusalem—to the assembly [ekklesia, or
      church] of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and to God, the judge
      of all, and to the spirits of the righteous made perfect, and to Jesus, the me-
      diator of a new covenant. (Heb. 12:22–24).


     Again, how is it that the saints on earth could be assembled in
heaven even now? Before the judgment seat of God, they have been
declared perfect through Christ’s new covenant. There, in heaven,
God counts all the saints, living and dead, as possessing standing.
     Furthermore, this heavenly assembly anticipates the end-time
assembly of all the saints who ever lived, gathered around the throne
of God—what the apostle John calls “a great multitude that no one
could count, from every nation, tribe, people and language, standing
before the throne and before the Lamb” (Rev. 7:9). For this reason,

242 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Church: Universal and Local


theologians refer to the universal church as not just a heavenly as-
sembly, but an eschatological (end-time) one.
     Definition 1: the universal church is a heavenly and eschatologi-
cal assembly of everyone—past, present, and future—who belongs to
Christ’s new covenant and kingdom.
     This is the church that Jesus promised to build in Matthew 16.
This is the entire body of Christ, the family of God, and temple of
the Spirit. Membership comes with salvation.

LOCAL CHURCH—AN EARTHLY ASSEMBLY
Yet a Christian’s heavenly membership in the universal church
needs to show up on earth, just like a Christian’s imputed righ-
teousness in Christ should show up in works of righteousness
( Jas. 2:14-26). Membership in the universal church describes
a “positional” reality. It’s a heavenly position or status in God’s
courtroom. It is therefore as real as anything else in or beyond the
universe. Yet Christians must then put on or enflesh or live out that
universal membership concretely, just like Paul says we must “put
on” our positional righteousness in existential acts of righteousness
(Eph. 4:24; Col. 3:10, 14).
      In other words, our membership in Christ’s universal and
heavenly body cannot remain an abstract idea. If it is real, it
will show up on earth—in real time and space with real people,
people with names like Betty and Saeed and Jamar, people we
don’t get to choose but who step on our toes and disappoint us
and encourage us and help us to follow Jesus. Membership in
the universal church must become visible in a local gathering of
Christians.
      To summarize the relationship, the universal church creates lo-
cal churches, while local churches prove, give evidence for, display,
even protect the universal church, like this:

243 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
APPENDIX




                                                  Local
            Creates
                                                 Churchs




                                                   Give
           Universal                           Evidence for,
            Church                               Display,
                                                 Protect


     Consider what this means: if a person says he belongs to the
church but he has nothing to do with a church, one might rightly
wonder if he really does belong to the church, just as we wonder
about a person who claims to have faith but has no deeds.
     The local church is where we see, hear, and literally rub shoulders
with the universal church—no, not all of it, but an expression of it.
     It is a visible, earthly outpost of the heavenly assembly. It is a
time machine which has come from the future, offering a preview of
this end-time assembly.

GATHERING, MUTUAL AFFIRMATION,
PREACHING, ORDINANCES
More specifically the universal church becomes a local church—it
becomes visible—through (i) a regular gathering or assembly of
people (ii) who mutually affirm one another as Christians (iii)
through preaching the gospel (iv) and participating in baptism and
the Lord’s Supper.

244 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Church: Universal and Local


      Let’s back up and explain. Every nation and kingdom possess
some way of saying who their citizens are. Today, countries use
passports and borders. Ancient Israel used both circumcision and
Sabbath-keeping, signs of the Abrahamic and Mosaic Covenant,
respectively. The church is not presently a land-possessing earthly
kingdom, yet this heavenly kingdom needs some way of affirming its
citizens on earth, too. How does it do that? How can these heavenly
citizens know who “they” are, both for their own sake and for the
sake of the nations?
      To answer that question, Jesus provided covenant signs for
members of the new covenant: the entrance sign of baptism, where-
by people are baptized into his name (Matt. 28:19); and the ongoing
sign of the Lord’s Supper, whereby they affirm one another as mem-
bers of his body (1 Cor. 10:17).
      Not only that, he gave local churches the authority to pub-
licly affirm their members as citizens of his kingdom—to affix
these covenantal signs on people, almost like a coach passing out
team jerseys. To that end, he gave churches the keys of the king-
dom to bind and loose on earth what’s bound and loosed in heaven
(Matt. 16:19; 18:18). What does that mean? It means churches pos-
sess the authority to render judgment on the what and the who of the
gospel—confessions and confessors. With the keys, he authorized
churches to say, “Yes, this is the gospel confession we believe in and
that you must believe in to be a member.” To say: “Yes, this is a true
confessor. We will baptize her into membership” or “We will remove
him from membership and the Lord’s Table for unrepentant sin.”
In everyday terms, Jesus gave this gathered assembly the keys of the
kingdom in order to write statements of faith and fill up member-
ship directories.

245 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
APPENDIX


      So definition 2: a local church is a mutually-affirming group of new
covenant members and kingdom citizens, identified by regularly gather-
ing together in Jesus’s name through preaching the gospel and celebrating
the ordinances.
      Jesus describes this gathered local church in Matthew 18. It is
an expression of the body of Christ, the family of God, and temple
of the Spirit.

EARLY CHURCH HISTORY:
LEANING TOWARD THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH
Through the history of the church, different individuals and tradi-
tions have emphasized either the universal or the local church.
      In the first generations following the apostles, the emphasis
rightly fell on both, at least as judged by early letters to churches
and their leaders by pastors like Clement of Rome and Ignatius.
The second-century document the Didache suggests likewise, with
its dual emphasis on the practical workings of a local church and
Christian faithfulness more broadly.
      Yet just as people sometimes shift their weight off of both feet
and onto one, so the writings of the church fathers moving into the
third, fourth, and fifth centuries presents a growing emphasis on the
universal church, albeit in an institutional guise. There were histori-
cal reasons for this. A number of theological heresies were cropping
up. Also, churches divided over how to treat Christians (and bishops
in particular) who denied Christ in the face of persecution but then
asked for readmission. Such pastoral challenges prompted everyone
from Cyprian to Augustine to emphasize the importance of being
united to the one, holy, apostolic, and catholic—meaning universal—
church. And unity with the one true universal church, they began to
say, required unity with the right bishop; and unity with the right
bishop, they eventually said, meant unity with the bishop of Rome, or

246 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Church: Universal and Local


the pope. In other words, catholicity or universality became an earthly
reality as much as a heavenly one. It belonged to the institutional
structures formally binding the global church together—an episco-
pacy supposedly tracing back to Peter and centering on the pope.
      The Protestant Reformation would break this pattern by offer-
ing a more spiritual conception of catholicity. They, too, affirmed the
necessity of external structures in the life of the church, but they also
began to distinguish between the visible and invisible church. They
argued that a person can belong to the visible church, but not the in-
visible church, or vice-a-versa, since salvation is not mechanistically
gained through baptism or the Supper but only by regeneration and
faith. This emphasis on the invisible church, then, effectively turned
the catholicity or universality of the church back into a spiritual
attribute, not an institutional one. The universal church, in other
words, would prove on the Last Day to be the invisible church across
space and time, not simply everyone who called themselves members
of visible churches.

LATER CHURCH HISTORY:
LEANING TOWARD THE LOCAL CHURCH
That said, the earliest Reformers like Luther, Calvin, and Cranmer
still maintained room in their thinking for an institutional form
of unity and catholicity (universality). Their denominations were
“connectional,” meaning, churches were formally and authoritatively
connected to one another. By their lights, such formal connection
was the requirement of unity and therefore catholicity. Hence,
they treated the visible church as consisting of more than the lo-
cal church—the assembly of people gathering in one locale. It also
included larger church hierarchies, whether presbyteries or epis-
copacies. Hence, they would name their churches the “Church of
England” or the “German Lutheran Church.” Not surprisingly, their

247 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
APPENDIX


theologies also emphasized the visible vs. invisible distinction as
much if not more than the local vs. universal distinction. The prac-
tice of infant baptism and the fact that unregenerate infants would
be treated as members of churches heightened the need for the invis-
ible vs. visible distinction. After all, unregenerate infants belong to
the visible but not the invisible church.
      Within a couple decades of the Reformation, however, the Ana-
baptists and eventually the Baptists would more completely locate
the unity of the catholic or universal church back into the heavens.
They argued that every church should remain institutionally inde-
pendent and consist only of believers. The visible church on earth,
they argued, is only the local church and only the local church—
the gathered, geographically-located congregation. The Church of
England, they would say, is not a church. It’s a parachurch or admin-
istrative structure binding multiple churches together.
      Yet among Baptist groups the risk now would be to shift the
weight of the body entirely onto the other foot, where Christians
would give all their attention to the local church and little to the uni-
versal. Certain strains of Baptist churches, such as the Landmarkists
of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, would in fact
argue that only the local church exists. They would also refuse to
share the Lord’s Supper with anyone who was not a member of their
own church. Gratefully, such strains were rare.
      Far more common has been the functional dismissal of the
universal church among commercial- and marketing-minded
church leaders in the late twentieth- and early twenty-first century
churches. Such churches will verbally affirm the existence of the
universal church. They will praise God for Christians around the
world in their sermons. But their self-reliant church practices too
often ignore the universal church. A marketplace mindset employs

248 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Church: Universal and Local


ministry language and methods that effectively promote a church’s
own brand identity, like a fast-food restaurant promoting its own
way of preparing hamburgers. This has the effect, presumably un-
intentionally, of pitting churches against one another. For instance,
church mission statements, which have been popular in the last few
decades, highlight a church’s unique mission emphases, as if Jesus
did not give every single church precisely the same mission statement
(Matt. 28:18–20). And this emphasis on what’s unique, instead of
an emphasis on the shared partnership, corresponds to working
separately from other churches, not together. So when a building is
full, a church’s first instinct is not to plant another church. Instead
it starts a second service or site. Churches might invite pastors from
other countries to visit and share prayer requests on stage, but they
won’t do this with a pastor from down the street.
      Overall, the marketing and branding-heavy mindset does not
entail opposing other churches, as it can among fast food restaurants.
Yet it does mean nearby churches ignore one another. Worse, they
have effectively placed themselves on a vast field of unacknowledged
competition, where the most charismatic speakers with the best
branding and programming draw numbers away from surrounding
churches. Partnership among churches in the same neighborhood or
city, then, is rare.

EMPHASIZING BOTH THE LOCAL
AND THE UNIVERSAL
Yet the biblical picture rests the body’s weight on both feet—the
local and the universal.
     The universal church “shows up” in local congregations, as I ar-
gued at the beginning. Yet it should also “show up” in every church’s
disposition to partner with other churches, even as we see among
churches in the New Testament. The New Testament churches

249 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
APPENDIX


shared love and greetings (Rom. 16:16; 1 Cor. 16:19; 2 Cor. 13:13;
etc.). They shared preachers and missionaries (2 Cor. 8:18;
3 John 5–6a). They supported one another financially with joy and
thanksgiving (Rom. 15:25–26; 2 Cor. 8:1–2). They imitated one
another in Christian living (1 Thes. 1:7; 2:14; 2 Thes. 1:4). They
cared for one another financially (1 Cor. 16:1–3; 2 Cor. 8:24). They
prayed for one another (Eph. 6:18). And more.
      Christians today might disagree about whether the Bible means
to establish institutional unity or connectivity between churches (I
do not believe it does). But every local church should love the uni-
versal church by loving, partnering with, and supporting other local
churches, including the ones nearest by. We should be willing to
share the Lord’s Supper with baptized members of other churches
when they visit with us.
      Also, every denominational tradition should affirm that Chris-
tians must join themselves to local churches since theses local churches
are expressions of the universal church. Our homeland in heaven has
sent out ambassadors and built-up embassies here and now. Those
gathered churches are an outpost, a foretaste, a colony, a representa-
tion of the final gathering. If you belong to the church, you will want
to join a church. It is where we put flesh upon our proclamation, our
faith, our fellowship, and our membership in Christ’s body.

FURTHER READING
   • Edmund Clowney, “The Church as a Heavenly and Eschato-
     logical Entity,” in The Church in the Bible and the World, ed. D.
     A. Carson (1987; repr. Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2002).
   • Mark Dever, “A Catholic Church,” in The Church: One, Holy,
     Catholic, Apostolic, by Richard D. Phillips, Philip G. Ryken,
     and Mark E. Dever (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R, 2004).

250 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
The Church: Universal and Local


    • David Schrock, “An Ecclesiology of Churches: Why the
      Universal Church Is Best Regarded as a Myriad of Lo-
      cal Churches” (Nov 10, 2016).
    • Stephen J. Wellum, “Beyond Mere Ecclesiology: The Church
      as God’s New Covenant Community,” in The Community of
      Jesus: A Theology of the Church, edited by Kendell H. Easley
      and Christopher W. Morgan (Nashville, TN: B&H, 2013).
    • J. L. Dagg, “The Local Churches” and “The Church Universal”
      in Manual of Church Order (1858; repr. Harrisonburg, VA:
      Gano Books, 1990).
    • Jonathan Leeman, “What Is a Local Church” (8/22/14).
    • Jonathan Leeman, “A Church and Churches: Integration”
      (5/10/13).
    • Jonathan Leeman, “A You a Universal Church-er or a Local
      Church-er?” (7/27/16).




251 | HEALTHY CHURCHES: A BEGINNER’S GUIDE
                        About
                     the Authors




Aaron Menikoff is the senior pastor of Mt. Vernon Baptist Church
in Sandy Springs, Georgia.

Mark Dever is the senior pastor of Capitol Hill Baptist Church in
Washington, D. C., and the President of 9Marks.

Mike Bullmore served for 25 years as senior pastor of Crossway
Community Church in Bristol, Wisconsin and is now teaching and
training pastors in multiple venues.

Samuel G. Parkison (PhD, Midwestern Seminary) is Associate
Professor of Theological Studies and Director of the Abu Dhabi
Extension Site at Gulf Theology Seminary in the United Arab
Emirates. Before coming to GTS, Samuel was Assistant Professor
of Christian Studies at Midwestern Baptist Theological Seminary,
and Pastor of Teaching and Liturgy at Emmaus Church in Kansas
City, MO. He is the author Revelation and Response: The Why and
How of Leading Congregational Worship Through Song (Rainer Pub-
lishing, 2019) and Thinking Christianly: Bringing Sundry Thoughts
Captive to Christ (H&E Publishing, 2022).

Greg Gilbert is the senior pastor of Third Avenue Baptist Church in
Louisville, Kentucky.
Bobby Jamieson (PhD, University of Cambridge) is planting Trin-
ity Baptist Church in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. He previously
served for seven years as an associate pastor of Capitol Hill Baptist
Church in Washington, DC. He is the author, most recently, of Ev-
erything Is Never Enough: A Surprising Path to Resilient Happiness
(WaterBrook, forthcoming).

J. Mack Stiles is the director of Messenger Ministries Inc., a think
tank working to develop healthy missions. He and his wife, Leeann,
have traveled and lived many places before landing in Erbil, Iraq, in
July 2017, including fifteen years in Dubai, UAE. Up until recently,
he was the pastor of Erbil International Baptist Church. Mack re-
sides in Louisville and is a member of Third Avenue Baptist Church.

Brad Wheeler is the senior pastor of University Baptist Church in
Fayetteville, Arkansas.

Jonathan Leeman edits the 9Marks series of books as well as the
9Marks Journal. He is also the author of several books on the
church. Since his call to ministry, Jonathan has earned a master
of divinity from Southern Seminary and a Ph.D. in Ecclesiology
from the University of Wales. He lives with his wife and four
daughters in Cheverly, Maryland, where he is an elder at Cheverly
Baptist Church.

Jason Seville is an associate pastor at Del Ray Baptist Church in
Alexandria, VA where he lives with his wife and five kids.

Geoff Chang serves as Assistant Professor of Church History and
Historical Theology and the Curator of the Spurgeon Library at
Midwestern Baptist Theological Seminary. He is also a pastor of
Wornall Road Baptist Church in Kansas City, Missouri.
Jeramie Rinne is an author and the senior pastor of Sanibel Com-
munity Church in Sanibel, Florida.

Garrett Kell is the lead pastor of Del Ray Baptist Church in Alex-
andria, Virginia.

Dave Harvey is the president of Great Commission Collective, a
church planting ministry in the US, Canada, and abroad. Before
this, he pastored for 33 years. He’s the author of many books includ-
ing, most recently, The Plurality Principle.

Matt Schmucker was the founding executive director of 9Marks. He
now organizes several conferences, including Together for the Gos-
pel and CROSS, while serving as member of Capitol Hill Baptist
Church in Washington, D.C.

Jamie Dunlop is an associate pastor of Capitol Hill Baptist Church
in Washington, DC.

Aubrey Sequeira grew up in South India. He is senior pastor of the
Evangelical Community Church of Abu Dhabi and an adjunct pro-
fessor of Gulf Theological Seminary in Dubai.

Brooks Buser is President of Radius International.
          Building Healthy Churches



                IS YOUR CHURCH HEALTHY?

  9Marks exists to equip church leaders with a biblical vision and
practical resources for displaying God’s glory to the nations through
                         healthy churches.


  To that end, we want to help churches grow in nine marks of health
that are often overlooked:


       1. Expositional Preaching
       2. Gospel Doctrine
       3. A Biblical Understanding of Conversion and Evangelism
       4. Biblical Church Membership
       5. Biblical Church Discipline
       6. A Biblical Concern for Discipleship and Growth
       7. Biblical Church Leadership
       8. A Biblical Understanding of the Practice of Prayer
       9. A Biblical Understanding and Practice of Missions


  At 9Marks, we write articles, books, book reviews, and an online
journal. We host conferences, record interviews and produce other
resources to equip churches to display God’s glory.


  Visit our website to find content in 40+ languages and sign up
to receive our free online journal. See a complete list of our
other language websites here:
  9marks.org/international


                             9marks.org
